Title: Fixation-evoked potentials reveal neural signatures of hierarchical belief-updating during decision-making

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
Fixation -evoked potentials reveal neural signatures of hierarchical b elief -

# updating during decision -making 

# Jordan Deakin 1, Romy Frömer 2, Sebastian Gluth 1

> 1

Department of Psychology & Hamburg Center of Neural and Cognitive Systems, 

University of Hamburg 

> 2

Centr e for Human Brain Health, School of Psychology, 

University of Birmingham 

Corresponding author: 

Jordan Deakin 

University of Hamburg 

Von -Melle -Park 11 

20146 Hamburg 

Germany 

Email:  jordan.deakin@uni -hamburg.de 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Many decisions require maintaining beliefs across multiple levels of representation , from sampling 

and integrating information to forming action plans . To elucidate these processes and reveal the 

neural mechanisms supporting them under naturalistic free -viewing conditions , we combined EEG 

and eye -tracking in a multi -attribute choice task . Leveraging our recently developed Multi -Attribute 

Search and Choice (MASC) model, we generated fixation -level predictions for val ue -belief updating 

processes encompassing attribute, option, and preference states . Behavior al and eye -tracking data 

confirmed search and choice dynamics as predicted by MASC . C rucially, fixation -evoked potentials 

(FEPs) reveal ed distinct neural signatures along the processing hierarchy. While attribute -level and 

option -level updates were reflected in an early fronto -central positivity and a centro -parietal 

positivity , respectively, emerging preferences were expressed in lateralize d motor -preparatory 

activity . Our preregistered study elucidates a hierarchy of neural belief -updating processes linking 

information sampling to decision formation and opens new research avenues for investigating neural 

attention and choice dynamics in naturalistic free -viewing paradigms .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

A defining feature of human cognition is to excel in mak ing decisions with high complexity that unfold 

through the extended sampling , weighting an d integration of information . Therefore, a central challenge 

for theories of decision -making is to explain how information is sampled and combined to form 

preference s1,2 . Converging evidence from eye -tracking studies investigating both value -based and 

perceptual decisions 3–6 has shown that attention and preference are tightly coupled . Decision -makers more 

often fixate items deemed attractive 7,8 and are also more likely to choose an item that they looked at 

longer 5,6,9,10 . This bidirectional relationship between (overt) attention and choice suggests that ch oices 

emerge dynamically as information is sampled over time. 

Accompanying the se empirical findings, computational models have helped formalizing the 

interaction between attention and choice in simple perceptual and value -based choices 3,6 . Many decisions, 

however, require m ore extended deliberation, during which information is actively sampled across 

multiple sources before being weighted and integrated over time. In this case , beliefs must be maintained 

at multiple levels of representation, from the evaluation of individual samples over their integration into 

beliefs about choice alternatives to the representation of relative evidence for one alternative over another. 

Arguably the most prominent example of such complex decision -making is m ulti -attribute choice , which 

has been formalized in many extant computational models 6,7,10 –15 . These models range from variations of 

the attentional Drift Diffusion Model (aDDM) , which treat attention as a passive bias on evidence 

accumulation in favor of attended attributes and options 6,10,16 , to models that explicitly model attentional 

allocation, for example by assuming that attributes are sampled in accordance with optimal search policies 

that maximize expected utility under sampling costs 17 .

Despite their success in explaining observable behavior, efforts to link computational models to 

latent neural processes have disproportionately relied on simple choice task s18 –20 . In contrast , r esearch 

extend ing this approach to multi -attribute choice has been limited largely to non -human primates 21 –24 or 

human fMRI studies 23,25,26 , aimed at identifying the brain regions involved . Conversely, w hile EEG offers 

substantially greater temporal resolution , it has traditionally been difficult to apply it to tasks involving 

active information search . This is because eye movements introduce substantial artifacts in to EEG 

recordings 27,28 and, perhaps even more importantly, induce temporal variability in processes of interest and 

their associated neural activity across trials . This renders it less likely to observe consistent choice -related 

activity . To account for these issues, previous work has artificially enforced central fixations and short 

response -deadlines. Consequently , the neural mechanisms supporting simple, let alone more complex 

decisions remain poorly understood , despite the ubiquity of such decisions in our everyday lives . Bridging 

this gap requires combining computational models that generate quantitative predictions about latent 

decision processes with methodologies capable of measuring neural activity during active information 

search. 

Here we address this gap in two ways. On the computational level, we us e our recently developed 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

Multi -Attribute Search and Choice theory (MASC )29 , a hierarchical Bayesian belief -updating model which 

predicts how information is sampled and integrated in complex decision problems. MASC assumes that 

decision -makers maintain probabilistic beliefs about the value of attributes and options , formalized as 

hierarchical belief distributions . Attention is used to sample information, and beliefs are iteratively 

updated until there is sufficient evidence to favor one option (Fig. 1). This hierarchical belief -updating 

framework distinguishes MASC from alternative theories that implement only attribute -level 

comparisons 30,31 or propose (attention -weighted) parallel processing of all availab le information 10,32 .

Central to the model is its myopic search rule, which assumes that observers plan one step ahead, 

sampling the attribute that maximizes the probability of choosing the associated option at the next step 12,33 .

Despite its simplicity, this search rule gives rise to adaptive search behavior in which attention is guided 

by a combination of value, uncertainty and attribute importance. In doing so, MASC accounts for a range 

of empirical phenomena in both simple and complex decisions , including the bidirectional relationship 

between attention and choice 3,5,6,8 and the distribution of attention to attributes over time 7,10,34,35 .

Fig. 1 | S chematic diagram of Multi -Attribute Search and Choice (MASC) .

Beliefs about the values of attributes and options are formalized as hierarchical belief distributions. Guided by the 

myopic search rule, the decision -maker selects an item on which to fixate. Thus, the high -weighted ‘storage’ attribute 

is likely sampled f irst (as shown here), and a sample is obtained which suggests a comparatively low attribute value. 

The corresponding attribute and option distributions are updated accordingly . After one fixation, the small separation 

between option posteriors does not con stitute sufficient evidence for a choice , so a new fixation is generated. The 

model predicts that the observer will likely switch to the green option (p = .18 + .36 + .12 = .66) which currently has 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

both higher value and higher uncertainty . Sampling its high -weighted storage attribute is most likely (p = .36) . Taken 

together, it emerges from MASC’s myopic search rule that weights, values, and uncertainty drive the information 

sampling process. 

On the neural level, w e leverage MASC to derive and test pred ictions for neural activity by 

combining EEG and eye -tracking in a pre -registered study . Combining EEG and free -viewing paradigms 

presents substantial challenges (e.g., the correction of ocular artefacts , temporal variability in process -

relevant neural activity and the temporal overlap between fixation -evoked responses) . To overcome these 

challenges and link th e momentary sampling of information to corresponding neural processes observed 

during the decision process , we harnessed recent advancements in EE G and eye -tracking coregistration 

and analysis techniques enabl ing the isolation of neural activity attributable to individual fixations 

(fixation -evoked potentials, FEPs) 36 –40 . We derived fixation -level predictions from MASC and tested 

whether these predictions could explain variability in the corresponding FEPs . Given MASC’s distinction 

between attribute -level and option -level belief updates, the model provides a nuanced test of whether the 

proposed Bayesian belief -updating dynamics are reflected in the brain. Specifically, we predicted to 

identify transient belief -updating signals at both levels of the choice hierarchy (i.e., attributes and options), 

as well as more sustained sig nals of the emerging preference for particular choice options. 

In addition to successfully replicating our previous work that MASC accounts for a multitude of 

attention -choice interactions 29 , we show that MASC -derived belief updates are indeed predictive o f

fixation -evoked neural activit y, with dissociable neural signatures for attribute and option -level belief 

updates . Importantly, these signals are distinct from the emerging preference in the brain, which is 

reflected in lateralized premotor activity . Together, our results provide converging behavior al and neural 

evidence that multi -attribute decisions involve sequential, fixation -driven belief updating consistent with 

Bayesian inference . More broadly, our findings establish a link between computational models of 

information search and the neural mechanisms that support complex decision -making and showcase how 

to investigate the neural basis of attention and choice dynamics under natural istic free -viewing conditions .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Fig. 2 | Experimental design and data analysis pipeline. 

a. Upper panel : Trial structure for the rating task. Participants rated 45 smartphones, each characterized by star 

ratings (0 -5) for three attributes. Icons for each attribute were first presented without star ratings (150 0 m s) and then 

together with the star ratings and rating scale (1 -10). Lower panel: Trial structure for the choice task , in which 

participants chose between pairs of smartphones. The six attribute icons ( three per option) were first presented alone 

(for 150 0 m s) before the star ratings appeared. Options were separated by color (green vs. blue) and position (left vs. 

right). Participants were free to move their eyes and choose their preferred option at any time . b. Generating MASC 

predictions: The model was fitted to the choice and eye -tracking data and simulated with the best -fitting parameters 

for each participant. For each fixation, the belief distributions were update d in accordance with the fixated attribute. 

Belief updates at the attribute (option) level were quantified by the KL divergence between the attribute (option) -

level posterior pre vs. post fixation. Preference was quantified as the Jeffrey’s distance betwee n posterior option 

distributions after the fixation. c. Synchronizing EEG and eye -tracking. Left panel: The two data streams were 

synchronized based on shared triggers sent to each system. Fixation onsets from the eye -tracker were used to mark 

corre sponding event s in the EEG signal. Right Panel: Across all participants and events, the average synchronization 

error was < 2 m s. d. Linear deconvolution allows modeling each fixation as a combination of MASC -generated 

predictors (left panel), while also remov ing temporally overlapping activity from neighboring fixations (right panel). 

# Results 

MASC captures the interplay of fixation and choice dynamics 

We recorded EEG and eye -movement data while participants (N = 57) made self -paced choices between 

pairs of smartphone options. Each smartphone was characterized by star ratings (0 -5) for three attributes :

screen size, battery capacity and storage space. Choice sets comprised an equal number of easy, medium 

and hard trials tailored to each participant based on item ratings obtained immediately before the choice 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

task (Fig. 2a ). In the main task, p articipants indicated their preferred option via button presses, using the ir 

left and right index fingers for the left and right option s, respectively . To deriv e the model -generated 

estimates us ed to predict fixation -evoked activity, we fit the MASC model to the behavior al data (see 

Methods for d etails) and verified that th e model captured the observed search patterns and choices. In 

brief, participants’ behavior replicated previous findings 29 and was well accounted for by MASC (Fig. 3).

First , MASC predicts an increase of the number of fixations and a decrease of choice consistency 

with increasing difficulty (i.e., decreasing option -value difference) . Within MASC’s Bayesian framework, 

increased difficulty corresponds to greater overlap between the two posterior option distributions , in 

which case more samples are required to disambiguate the options . Yet, this sampling increase is rarely 

exhaustive, so that co nsistency is still predicted to decline for more difficult trials. In line with the model ’s 

predictions , participants made fewer fixations in easy compared to medium difficulty trials ( t(56) = -

10.082, p < .001, Cohen’s d = -1.335) and in medium compared t o hard trials ( t(56) = -9.450, p < .001, d =

-1.252 , Fig. 3a ). Moreover , participants chose the higher -value option more frequently in easy compared 

to medium difficulty trials ( t(56) = 18.290, p < .001, d = 2.423) and in medium compared to hard trials 

(t(56) = 7.840 , p < .001, d = 1. 038 , Fig. 3b ).

Previous work ha s shown that options receiving more attention are more likely to be chosen 4,6 .

MASC reproduces this effect , which emerges naturally from its search rule , because e arly positive 

samples promote further inspection of the same alternative (in an effort to obtain decisive evidence) ,

thereby increas ing its choice probability. To test this prediction , we regressed the probability of choosing 

Option 1 onto the pr oportion of fixations allocated to Option 1 while controlling for value difference in a 

logistic regression. In accordance with MASC, this analysis revealed a positive association between 

attention and choice probability (t(56) = 13.7 30, p < .001, d = 1.819 , Fig. 3c ). The tendency to revisit 

promising options demonstrates that attention is guided by value in MASC , in line with studies 

demonstrat ing a positive association of value and fixation that strengthen s over time 7,35 . To test for this 

effect in the data, we regressed the probability of fixating Option 1 onto the value difference between the 

two options, the fixa tion number and the ir interaction. The positive main effect of value difference showed 

that participants indeed sampled higher value options more often (t(56) = 10.755, p < .001, d = 1.425), 

while the significant interaction confirmed that this bias increased over time ( t(56) = 5.146, p < .001, d =

0.682, Fig. 3d). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Fig. 3 | Behavior al and eye -tracking data with corresponding MASC predictions. 

a. Difficult trials require more samples to tease apart options, leading to an increase in the number of fi xations with 

increasing difficulty. b. Efficient searches are non -exhaustive, leading to lower choice consistency in difficult trials. 

c. Sampling positive information from a choice option promote s further inspection of it and increase s its choice 

probability , leading to a positive association between attention and choice. d. Attending to high -value items increases 

the probability of making a choice in the next step. As such, higher -value options are attended to more often (Val .

Diff. = value difference) , and this tendency increases over time (Inter ac . = interaction) . e. -f. Important attributes are 

attended early on, as they provide more decisive evidence. Later, attention shifts to other attributes as uncertainty 

reduction and value take precedence in guiding attention. g. -h. Participants who assign disproportionately high 

weight to one attribute tend to make more attribute -wise transitions, as reflected in a lower Payne Index. Shaded 

areas and error bars represent 95% confidence interval s; ** *p < .0 01 .

As well as prioritizing high value s, MASC also predicts an intricate dynamic dependency of 

attention on the importance of information (i.e., attribute weights). The decision -maker is expected to first 

focus on the most important information but then shift attention to less important information when the 

former provides insufficient evidence (Fig. 3e ). The empirical patterns in our experiment are strikingly 

similar to the predictions of MASC (Fig. 3f). To test this formally , w e reg ressed the probability of fixating 

an attribute as a function of its weight and fixation number . The intercept coefficient was significantly 

higher than chance level, showing that participants fixated more often on the highest weighted attribute 

(t(56) = 6.3 80 , p < .001, d = 0.8 45 ). Likewise, the effect of fixation number was negative ( t(56) = -4. 197 ,

p < .001, d = -0.55 6), showing that this tendency decreased over time .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

Finally, we tested whether MASC captures individual differences in search patterns as a function 

of the dispersion of attribute weights. Previous work has shown that participants with more extreme 

attribute weights tend to exhibit more attribute -wise than option -wise search patterns 10 , switching between 

the same attribute of different options rather than across different attributes of the same option. MASC 

predicts this effect because comparing a dominant attribute across options should provide the most 

decisive evidence (Fig. 3g ). To test this prediction in the data, we examined the correlation between 

attribute dispersion (defined as the difference between the two highest -weighted attributes) and the Payne 

Index 41 , which summarizes search patterns by calculating the ratio of option -wise to attribute -wise 

transitions. In line with MASC’s prediction , this correlation was sign ificantly negative (r(55 ) = -0. 34 9, p =

.00 4, Fig. 3h ).

Taken together, we replicated the series of behavior al and eye -tracking results reported in our 

previous work 26 , suggesting that multi -attribute decisions are governed by efficient information -search and 

preference -formation dynamics as predicted by our theory. 

Analyzing fixation -evoked EEG potentials 

Having established that our computational framework account s for the empirical search and choice 

patterns, we next examined the neural dynamics predicted by MASC. More specifically, our theory 

assumes that decision -makers use sequential fixations to sample attribute values (i.) for updating belief 

states on both th e attribute -level (ii.) and option -level (iii.) to ultimately turn these signals into a n

emerging preference (iv.) for the currently best option. We therefore predicted to identify latent belief -

updating signals at both levels of the choice hierarchy (i.e. , attributes and options) that are not only 

separable from each other but also distinct from signals reflecting the fixated attribute values as well as the 

emerging preference. Thereto, we defined the following linear deconvolution model 37,42,43 to predict 

fixation -evoked EEG activity 

𝐹𝐸𝑃 ~ 1 + 𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑉𝑎𝑙 + 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑈𝑝𝑑 + 𝑂𝑝𝑡𝑈𝑝𝑑 + 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 + 𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑁𝑢𝑚 

𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒 ) + 𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ),

where Fixated Val refers to the value of the fixated attribute , AttUpd and OptUpd are MASC -generated 

predictors (based o n the Kullbac k-Leibler divergence) quantifying the magnitude of belief updat es at the 

attribute and option levels , respectively , and Preference quantifies the strength and direction of evidence 

for one option over the other (see Methods for details) . FixNum controls for the ordinal fixation number 

within a trial and the final two predictors (sac_amplitude and duration) are spline covariates used t o

control for the non -linear effect s of saccade amplitude and fixation duration on the FEP s40,44 –47 . After 

fitting the deconvolution model to each participant separately, the resulting beta weights were subject to 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

threshold -free cluster permutation tests 48,49 to identify timepoints and electrodes where these predictors 

explained the most variance . Strikingly, these tests revealed s ignificant main effects of all predictors, with 

distinct topologies and temporal characteristics for each (Fi g. 4). 

Fig. 4 | MASC -generated predictors for FEPs reveal distinct spatiotemporal profiles. 

Topographical maps showing the t -values of significant clusters associated with the predictor s of fixated value ( a. ), 

attribute -level updating ( b. ), option -level updating ( c. ), and the preference of the currently favor ed option ( d. ). 

Statistical maps are obtained using threshold -free permutation test ing (E = 0.5, H = 2) and averaged across a 10 0 m s

sliding window (left). The right panels show the beta coefficients averaged across channels within the respective 

cluster. Lines indicate the temporal extent of significant clusters. 

A t ransient and non -linear representation of fixated value 

As a first processing step at each fixation, the decision -maker is expected to process the sampled 

attribute’s value. This predictor was associated with a transient effect spanning 23 0-37 4 m s (peak latency 

= 30 6 m s, p < .001) in a cluster of fronto -central electrodes, indicating mo re positive amplitudes for higher 

value attributes (Fig. 4a) . To explore the effect in more detail, we reconstructed the individual FEPs using 

the beta weights from the deconvolution model and averaged them according to the rounded value of the 

fixated att ribute (Fig. 5a). Notably , this analysis suggests the fixated -value effect to be primarily driven by 

fixations to the highest value attributes (star ratings 4 -5), with little difference between average and low 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

values (Fig. 5b). High -value attributes are not only relevant for making a choice based on momentary 

evidence but also play a key role in guiding future attention by facilitating the identification of promising 

options that merit further inspection. In this sense, high -value attributes may signal pr ogress toward s the 

goal of reaching a decision and thereby be subject to additional processing . Aligned with this 

interpretation , an analysis of fixation duration revealed a small but significant effect of value, with longer 

durations for higher values (Fi g. 5b inset) . Like the effect on the FEPs, this was driven by slightly longer 

fixations to the highest value attributes, with little difference between low and average values (see 

Supplementary Table 1 -2 for statistical analyses ). 

A fronto -central signal of sustained and linear updating of attributes 

A core prediction of MASC is that sampl ing information leads to belief update s about the corresponding 

attribute value s, shifting both the mean and precision of the ir belief distribution s. Similar to the fixat ed -

value signal, t he magnitude of attribute -level updating was also associated with a positive, fronto -central 

cluster of electrodes (Fig. 4b ). Y et , the effect was much more sustained (range: 19 2 m s – 106 2 m s, peak 

time = 59 0 m s, p < .001). In contrast to the non -linear encoding of fixated value (Fig. 5b), the amplitude 

of this FEP scaled linearly with the magnitude of attribute updating (Fig. 5d), suggesting an accurate 

neural representation across both smaller and larger belief updates. The temporal and t opographical 

characteristics of this effect overlap with prior work showing that larger belief updates are associated with 

stronger fronto -central activity that scales with the degree to which internal models of the environment are 

updated 50 –53 . Thus, it appears that the effects associated with fixated value and attribute -updating reflect 

two distinct but interlinked processes : initial appraisal of the fixated value trigger ing a corresponding 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

attribute -level belief update. 

Fig. 5 | Reconstructed FEPs and average amplitude for the fixated value and attribute updating predictors .

a. Reconstructed FEP s averaged across the electrodes in the FixatedVal cluster. Lines correspond to the average 

FEP s for the rounded value (star rating) of the fixated attribute , and the grey shaded area shows the time window 

associated with the cluster. b. Lines correspond to the average FEPs for the quantile (.1,.3,.5,.7,.9) binned level of the 

AttUpd predictor. c,d . Av erage amplitude of each average FEP within th e time window associated with the cluster. 

For FixatedVal, the inset shows the effect of FixatedVal on fixation duration. Error bars represent the within -subject 

standard errors computed with the Cousineau -Morey correction. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

A hierarchical distinction between attribute and option -level updates 

Once an attribute -level belief is updated, MASC assumes the next step in the hierarchy is to weight 

attribute -level beliefs to form beliefs about the option’s overall value. Notably, updating at the option -

level is qualitatively differ ent from attribute -level updating because it requires integration across multiple 

belief states. Consistent with this computational distinction, the effects for option updating were 

topographically distinct from those of attribute -level updates , with activ ity in a positive cluster of parietal 

electrodes being uniquely predicted by the option -updating predictor (range: 20 8-105 0 m s, peak latency =

57 4 m s, p < .001) . Centro -parietal activity has previously been linked to the accumulation of evidence in 

decision -making 54,55 . However, the present finding that this signal reflect s within -sample integration of 

attribute information into option -level updates aligns most closely with a recent study linking the centro -

parietal positivity (CPP) to similar sample -level belief updates in an expanded judgment task 56 .

Option -updating signals are dynamically shaped by attribute weights 

A core feature of MASC is its ability to predict how the three factors of attribute weight ing , uncertainty, 

and value dynamically guide attention during the emerging decision. Critically, the theory thus provides a 

precise account of the initial prioritization of the most important attribute, which then decays at later 

fixations ( Fig. 3e -f). With respect to neural belief -updating signals , MASC predicts that attribute 

importance should modulate the magnitude of option -belief updates , since it assumes that option -level 

beliefs are a weighted combination of attribute -level beliefs . Taking both the attentional dynamics and the 

integration rule into account, we therefore expected the option -level updating signal to be more sensitive 

to attribute weights during early compared to late fixations . To test this prediction, we averaged the 

reconstructed FEPs across fixation number and the weight of the fixated attribute. Since the effect of 

attribute weight diminishes rather early, we restricted this analysis to the first six fixations of each trial. 

We took the time points and channels associated with option -level updating effects (Fig. 4c) and 

calculated the mean amplitude of the FEPs within the time windows of each cluster. These amplitudes 

were then subject to a 3 (Attribute Weigh t: highest, medium, lowest) x 6 (Fixation Number: first to sixth) 

repeated -measures ANOVA to test for both main effects and the interaction of the two factors. Not ably ,

attribute weight was not a predictor in the deconvolution model and th us did not directly influence the 

estimates of the FEPs. 

The ANOVA revealed all effects to be significant , and the mean amplitudes ( Fig. 6 b) closely 

resembled attentional dynamics ( Fig. 3f ). There was a main effect of Fixation Number ( F(5,280) = 7.712, 

p < .001, η p2 = .121), with mean amplitude generally decreasing from the first to the sixth fixation, mainly 

driven by larger amplitudes for the first fixation. Crucially, there was also a main effect of Attribute 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Weight ( F(2,112) = 7.935, p < .001, η p2= .12 4), such that option -update effects were larger for more 

important attributes. In line with the decaying prioritization of the most important attribute in both MASC 

and the eye -tracking data, we observed a similar development of the FEP amplitudes, resulti ng in a 

significant interaction between Attribute Weight and Fixation Number ( F(10,560) = 2.383, p = .009, η p2 =

.041). Simple effects analyses revealed that the influence of Attribute Weight was significant only at the 

first, second and fifth fixations, w ith a dynamic shift of the highest mean amplitude from the most 

important (at fixations one and two) to the second -most important attribute (at fixation five). 

Fig. 6 | Effects of attribute weights on attribute -level and option -level updates. 

a. Hierarchical belief updating in MASC. MASC assumes attribute -level beliefs are weighted by importance and 

integrated to form option -level beliefs. In this example, the three attributes are believed to have comparatively low, 

average and high values, respec tively. However, the highly weighted low -value attribute dominates, skewing the 

option distribution leftwards towards lower values. Thus, attribute weighting affects beliefs only at the option level. 

b-c. Mean z -scored amplitudes within the cluster time wi ndow for option (b.) and attribute (c.) updating clusters, by 

fixation number and attribute weight. Error bars represent the within -subject standard errors computed with the 

Cousineau -Morey correction. In accordance with MASC, only option -level updates were dynamically modulated by 

attribute weights with greater effects at early fixations , which decreased over time. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

While MASC predicts that attribute weighting influences option -level beliefs, the hierarchical 

structure of the model implies that weighti ng operates only at this higher level and therefore does not 

affect the magnitude of lower -level attribute updates. Accordingly, we expected attribute weighting not to 

modulate neural activity associated with attribute updating. Thus, we repeated the same analysis on the 

time points and channels associated with attribute -level updating effects. This analysis revealed only a 

significant effect of Fixation Number ( F(5,280) = 2.933, p = .013, η p2 = .050), which showed that peak 

amplitudes generally increased from the first to the last fixation ( Fig. 6 c). However, in line with our 

predictions, there was neither a main effect of Attribute Weight ( F(2,112) = 2.527, p = .084, η p2 = .043), 

nor an interaction ( F(10,560) = 1.222, p = .273, η p2 = .021, Fig. 6b). 

Late ralized signatures of preference strength and direction emerge in preparatory motor areas 

As a last step in the processing hierarchy, MASC tracks the preference for the currently best option by 

comparing its option -level belief distribution with the competitor option to determine whether a choice is 

warranted or instead additional samples should be taken . Correspondingly , we defined the preference 

predictor as the Jeffrey’s distance between the two posterior option distributions at each fixa tion , signed 

according to the option with the higher posterior mean. Based on prior work 18,56 , we expected to see 

fixation -level evidence of an emerging preference, manifesting as preparatory activity over motor areas 

contralateral to the responding hand associated with the currently preferred option. 

As expected, w e found two clusters of lateralized activity, the sign of which was determined by 

the currently preferred option (Fig. 4d) . Specifically , negative -going deflection s reminiscent of the 

lateralized readiness potential (LRP) 57 were observed in the hemisphere contralate ral to the currently 

preferred option . Importantly, this signature of emerging preference was distinct from the eventual 

response itself, as our analysis excluded fixations that overlapped with the response , and because response 

onsets were modelled as separate events in the same deconvolution model (see Methods) .

In a next step, we added the final Choice as an additional regressor alongside the Preference 

predictor in the regression model. This analysis served two purposes. First, it can provide furth er evidence 

for a successful separation of neural signatures of the emerging preference from those of the eventual 

choice. Second, it allows distinguishing effects related to the direction of evidence (i.e., left vs. right) from 

the magnitude of preference (as for the majority of fixations, the currently best option was also the 

eventually chosen option). Although attenuated , the significant effects of Preference persisted when 

including Choice in the model. Interestingly , evidence of lateralization relatin g to the Choice predictor 

emerged relatively early and remained sustained across the time window (Fig. 7a) , whereas residual 

Preference effects were confined to later time points (Fig. 7b) . This might suggest that the direction of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

preference (i.e., left vs. right) is maintained over consecutive fixations, while the strength of this 

preference is directly modulated by the momentary changes after encoding the attribute - and option -level 

belief updates by the current fixation (see above) .

Fig. 7 | Separat ing the direction and strength of the emerging preference. 

a. The direction of current preference, accounted for by the Choice predictor is reflected in lateralized and sustained 

activity across the fixation window. b. In contrast, the magnitude of the preference, reflected in the residual variance 

accounted for by the Preference predictor appears comparatively late, presumably after the belief update provided by 

the current fixation is encoded. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

# Discussion 

Despite the ubiquitous challenge to integrate many sources of information in everyday human decision -

making, the neural processes underlying these choices remains elusive. Multi -attribute choice provides a 

valuable test case because it captures many of the deliberative processes characteristic of complex 

decisions, wi th MASC allow ing these processes to be formally specified and tested. Until now, most of 

the existing work on multi -attribute choice has stud ied non -human primates 21 –24 , or rel ied on the 

temporally imprecise fMRI -BOLD signal 23,25,26 . Moreover, investigating the neural dynamics of complex 

decisions with EEG or MEG has so far been limited by forcing participants to maintain central 

fixation 20, 58 . Here, we address ed th ese limitations and elucidate d the neural dynamics of multi -attribute 

decision -making using the recently proposed MASC 29 theory as our computational framework . Combin ing

EEG and eye -tracking in a choice paradigm that allowed participant s to freely move their eyes and to 

respond at will , we isolated fixation -evoked activity to capture neural computations associated with each 

information sample. We found that fixation -evoked activity tracked se veral key predictions of MASC ,

encompassing initial sampling, belief updating and ultimately preference formation. 

At the core of MASC’s Bayesian framework is the assumption that multi -attribute decisions 

unfold through an iterative , hierarchical process , in which beliefs about the value of individual attributes 

are updated with each new information sample, before being weighted and integrate d into option -level 

value representations. Consistent with this architecture , we found dissociable effects of attribute -level and 

option -level updating with distinct spatial profiles. Attribute updates were reflected in a positive front o-

central response that scaled linearly with update magnitude, while the integration of these beliefs into 

option -level representa tions was associated with a positive cluster over centro -parietal electrodes. 

Furthermore, option -level, but not attribute -level , update effects were sensitive to the weight of the fixated 

attribute , with fixations to highly -weighted attributes producing l arger option -update responses during 

early fixations, before this effect decayed over time, as predicted by MASC. Notably , our findings of 

spatially d issociable neural signals of attribute and option -level updating are consistent with fMRI 

research , which has established a comparable separated encoding of attribute and integrated option values 

in distinct brain regions 23 .

For attribute updates, t he spatiotemporal profile of the effect is reminiscent of the P3 event -related 

potential 51 , which is commonly divided into an earlier fronto -central (P3a) and a later parietal (P3b) 

component . Given the frontal topography of the effect and its timing, the present findings appear more 

compatible with P3a. P3a amplitude has been shown to scale with the magnitude of belief updates during 

Bayesian inference and learning 52,53 , while work using fMRI has shown that model -derived measures of 

Bayesian be lief updating are correlated with activity in the anterior cingulate cortex 59 , an area proposed to 

be the cortical generator of the P3a 60 . In contrast, the effect associated with option updat ing is highly 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

similar to the centro -parietal positivity (CPP) 61 , a component strongly implicated in both perceptual and 

value -based decision -making 19,21,62 –64 . While the CPP has traditionally been li nked to evidence 

accumulation, acting as an integrator over previous decision samples 19,54,55,65 , other work using tasks in 

which information is sampled sequentially has suggested that the CPP indexes belief updating. For 

example, in a perceptual categorization task 66 , a CPP -like response observed around 50 0 m s after sample 

onset was found to encode ‘decision updates’, showing positive encoding of the current sample alongside 

ne gative encoding of neighboring samples. Remarkably consistent with our results, a recent study 56 used 

an expanded judgment task and found the CPP to reflect the magnitude of sample -level belief updates, 

while decision evidence was accumulated downstream in preparatory motor areas. Accordingly, it was 

proposed that the CPP reflects the intermediate step of mapping individual samples into decision -relevant 

evidence prior to its accumulation elsewhere. Supporting this inte rpretation, the CPP in the present study 

appears to be integrating attribute -level beliefs into option -level representations, whereas later activity in 

preparatory motor areas tracks the MASC -generated Preference predictor, which reflects the evolving 

evid ence in favor of an option and the currently preferred option over successive samples. 

MASC’s architecture of fixation -dependent hierarchical belief -updating processes distinguishes it 

from many other theories of multi -attribute decision -making . For insta nce, the multi -attribute attentional 

drift -diffusion model assumes more gradual preference -formation dynamics, in which new fixations only 

bias the drift of an otherwise continuous evidence trace 10 . MASC is also distinct from accounts that 

assume multi -attribute decisions to emerge without any computation of integr ated option value s30,31 .

Notably , there is considerable behavior al and neural evidence that multi -attribute decisions can rely on 

direct comparis ons on the attribute level 2,23,24,26 . In its current form, MASC does not directly implement 

such attribute -level comparison processes, although the model does account for the attentional 

prioritization of the most important attribute at ear ly fixations (Fig. 3e) and the associated FEP patterns 

(Fig. 6 b). Importantly , participants in this study and our previous work 29 exhibited a predominantly 

option -wise search strategy, as indicated by the positive Payne Index in our eye -tracking data (Fig . 3h) ,

suggest ing that decisions were mainly based on value integration. Yet, future extensions of our 

computational framework could also enable attribute -wise comparisons to test whether this mechanism 

biases neural option -value updating signals or forgoes this hierarchy level entirely to directly impact 

preference formation 30,31 .

Although the fixated value predictor is not specific to MASC, the representation of sampled 

values can be considered its first processing step . Remarkably, we found the associated transient and 

front o-central potential to be disproportionately driven by high -value attributes , which were also fixated 

longer by participants. Based on this observation, we conjecture that high -value attributes are 

preferentially processed , as they not only provide momentary evidence in favor of an option but also play 

a key role in guiding future attention by identifying candidate options that w arrant further inspection (as 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

predicted by MASC) . Preferential processing of high -value attributes is also consistent with work on the 

reward positivity (RewP), an ERP component commonly observed in reinforcement -learning tasks in 

response to positive feed back 67 . The RewP shows a similar front o-central topography to the fixated -value 

effect observed here, and its amplitude has been shown to correlate with hedonic appraisal 68 . Moreover, 

the RewP appears to respond disproportionate ly to positive outcomes, with neutral and negative outcomes 

elicit ing similar baseline activity 67 . As such, the RewP has been suggested to reflect a n abstract 

representation of goal attainment 69,70 , indexing the extent to which a stimulus helps move the decision -

maker towards a goal . Because attribute and option -level belief updating were dissociable from these 

signals , t his RewP -like effect could potentially reflect an early evaluative signal which indicates that the 

current information is promising, before this information is incorporated into a belief update. Future 

studies should examine whether this effect reverses when the decision goal changes (i.e., fr om choosing 

the preferred option to the least -preferred option 71 ), such that low values elicit stronger r esponses. 

To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to combine EEG and eye -tracking in a free -

viewing , value -based decision -making paradigm, extending a methodolog y that has so far been used 

predominantly to study reading and scene exploration 36,72,73 . By capturing both the temporal dynamics of 

neural processing and the real -time allocation of visual attention, the two complementary measures offer a 

powerful framework for in vestigating how information is sampled and transformed into choices under 

naturalistic viewing conditions. Beyond the multi -attribute decisions examined here, the same approach is 

broadly applicable to other choice contexts in which eye movements play a cr itical role, including 

decisions involving many alternatives 71 or options with perceptually challenging o r noisy evidence 74 , as 

well as multi -cue inferences and categorization 34,75 . The MASC framework ma y also generalize to covert 

attentional shifts 58 , provided these can be accurately measured. More generally, ou r findings establish 

free -viewing EEG –eye -tracking as a promising tool for probing the interaction between attention and 

choice, and for studying the neural computations that support a wide range of complex decisions. 

In summary, by combining EEG and eye -tracking paired with the computational framework of the 

MASC model , we provide a unified account of the neural mechanisms underlying multi -attribute decision -

making, tracing the process from information sampling to preference formation. We show that core 

predictions of MASC are reflected both in patterns of overt attention and in latent neural activity, which 

can be hierarchically dissociated into attribute and option -level representations. We further show that 

these belief states are subsequently integrate d to shape preferences over successive samples. Together, our 

results provide evidence that multi -attribute decision -making unfold s as a recurrent and hierarchical 

process of sequential sampling and updating. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Methods 

Preregistration 

Prior to data collection, the project was preregistered on the Open Science Framework (OSF ,

https://osf.io/bv6s5/ ), using the OSF preregistration template. We preregistered two sets of hypotheses 

relating to continuous signals which track the emergence of a choice throughout the trial, and markers of 

updating at the level of individual fixations. More specifically, we predicted to identify updating signals at 

the level of attributes and options, larger (option -level) updates for more important attributes, a nd an 

association of lateralized preparatory motor activity with the emerging preference. Preregistration also 

included exclusion criteria (i.e., incomplete datasets, poor eye -tracking and/or EEG quality) as well as the 

pre -processing of the EEG data and t he subsequent deconvolution analysis. 

Participants 

To determine the sample size, an a -priori power analysis was performed based on conducting separate 

tests for detecting EEG signals related to updating processes (e.g., option -level updating) and to 

conti nuous processes (e.g., emerging preferences). To achieve a joint statistical power of 80% for 

detecting both effects, the power analysis suggested testing at least 52 participants. Taking dropouts into 

account, a total of 70 participants were recruited via the University of Hamburg’s online recruiting system 

in exchange for either course credit or monetary remuneration (15 Euro per hour). Participants were 

required to be between 18 and 35 years of age, be able to speak German, not wear glasses, or suffer fr om 

any physical, psychological or neurological disorders. Data from 13 subjects was excluded due to 

technical issues (6 participants), excessive movement leading to poor quality EEG data (5 participants) 

and participants pressing buttons at random without fixating the attributes (2 participants). This left 57 

participants in the final analysis (44 females, 13 males, mean age = 24.75 years, SD = 4.89 years). All 

participants gave written informed conse nt and the study was approved by the Local Ethics Committ ee of 

the Faculty of Psychology and Human Movement Sciences at the University of Hamburg (#AZ 

2022_046) .

Stimuli 

The study was conducted in a darkened room and stimuli were presented us ing Psychtoolbox version 3.0.19 

in MATLAB R2021b . The background was gr ay (RBG: 127, 127, 127) throughout the experiment and 

stimuli were custom made icons (100 x 175 pixels) representing the three attributes (battery capacity, storage 

space and screen size), with their color denoting the option to which they belonged (green (RGB: 37, 86, 

24), or blue (RGB: 0, 67, 164) in the choice task and black (RGB: 0, 0, 0) in the rating task). A pale -yellow 

star (RGB, 255, 255, 192, alpha = 0.76) spanning 100 x 100 pixels was superimposed onto the bottom of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

each attribute icon, which dis played the respective star rating in black text to one decimal place. Stimuli 

were presented on a 24 -inch screen with a resolution of 1920 x 1080 pixels and a refresh rate of 144 Hz. 

Button presses were made on a mechanical keyboard with < 1 m s latency. 

Pr ocedure 

The main experiment consisted of two parts, a rating phase followed by a choice phase. At the beginning 

of the rating phase, participants were informed about the three smartphone attributes (screen size, battery 

capacity and storage space), the ran ge of star ratings (0 -5) and shown the icons associated with each 

attribute. In each rating trial, the three attribute icons (displayed in black) together with the corresponding 

star ratings were displayed for a single smartphone. The attribute icons were arranged horizontally (see 

Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 1 ), with their position randomized across trials. Participants were 

instructed to rate how much they liked the smartphone based on the displayed attributes using a mouse -

controlled slider ranging fr om 1 to 10. As the mouse was moved along the scale, the current rating was 

updated and displayed in real time. Participants selected their rating by clicking the mouse, after which the 

selected value was shown to 1 decimal place. They could then either con firm the rating by pressing the 

space bar or revise it by pressing the ‘q’ key. Pressing the space bar advanced to the next trial, whereas 

pressing the ‘q’ key reset the current one. All participants rated the same set of 45 simulated smartphones, 

presented in a randomized order across participants. The attribute values of the smartphone s were sampled 

pseudo -randomly, ensuring an equal distribution of low -value (overall value = 0-5 stars), medium -value 

(overall value = 5 -10 stars) and high -value (overall value = 10 -15) options . Neither eye movements nor 

EEG were recorded during the rating phase. 

After completion of the rating task, a custom -built algorithm was used to construct equally sized 

sets of easy, medium and hard trials based on the participant’s ratings for each smartphone. First, all 

possible pairs of options were generated and ‘no -brainer’ trials in which one option was superior on all 

attributes were discarded. For the remaining valid comparisons, trials were ranked and bin ned into tertiles 

(easy, medium, hard) based on the rating differences for the option pairs. To ensure the most even 

distribution of option appearances, a permutation test was conducted for each difficulty level. Over 50,000 

permutations, 140 comparisons w ere drawn at random from each difficulty bin and the standard deviation 

of the chosen option counts were calculated. The draw with the most even distribution of item appearances 

(the lowest standard deviation) was retained. This resulted in a total of 420 choice trials (140 per 

difficulty) and ensured each option was roughly equally represented. 

In the choice phase, participants were reminded of the attribute icons, the range of star ratings and 

were informed that they would now choose between two smartpho nes in each trial (a green option and a 

blue option). Each trial began with a black fixation cross displayed in the center of the screen, on which 

participants were required to maintain fixat ion on for 500 m s before a trial would start. A square region of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

interest (400 x 400 pixels) invisible to the participant, was centered on the fixation cross. Once the eye 

tracker recorded that participants had maintained fixation within this region for at least 500 m s, the trial 

would begin. If participants moved their eyes out of this region within 500 m s, the timer was reset. This 

ensured that initial fixations were always in the center of the display and that the trial could not begin if 

the position of the eye coul d not be accurately registered. 

Following the offset of the fixation cross, the attribute icons, without the associated star ratings 

appeared. The six stimuli (three attributes for each option) were positioned at equal angular intervals on an 

invisible ci rcle with a radius of 400 pixels, forming a hexagonal configuration. Each attribute icon was 

colored based on its corresponding option (green (RGB: 37, 86, 24), or blue (RGB: 0, 67, 164)), with all 

attributes for the blue option presented on one side of th e screen and all attributes for the green option on 

the other side. The side associated with each option color was counterbalanced across participants. This 

preview period was intended to give participants time to identify the locations of each attribute, thereby 

minimizing the occurrence of early exploratory fixations related to display familiarization rather than 

decision processes. To further help participants localize the attributes, the positions of the attribute icons 

stayed constant for 70 consecutiv e trials, after which they were reassigned. Before each reassignment, 

participants were notified that the positions were to change through an onscreen message. 

After 150 0 m s, the star ratings appeared, superimposed onto the attribute icons. Participants were 

instructed to choose which option they preferred using the ‘S’ and ‘K’ keys for the left or right option 

using their left and right index fingers, respectively. The stimuli remained on screen until a choice was 

made and participants could move their e yes freely. Once a choice was made, the respective response 

square was highlighted with an arrow for 50 0 m s to inform the participant that their response had been 

registered, after which the screen turned blank for an intertrial interval sampled from betwe en 1500 and 

250 0 m s before the presentation of the fixation cross for the next trial. Participants were invited to take a 

break every 50 trials. If a participant decided to take a break, they were required to press the ‘S’ key to 

indicate when they were re ady to continue and the eye tracker was recalibrated. 

Statistical analyses 

For the behavioral analysis of choice and attention patterns, a frequentist statistical approach was used. 

Data was aggregated within participants (e.g., means and regression coeffi cients) and inferential statistics 

(e.g., t-tests , Pearson correlation ) were performed at the group level using an alpha -level of 5%. All 

behavioral t-tests were one -sided. For the threshold -free cluster permutation tests, significant clusters were 

identified using a two -sided (corrected) significance threshold of p < .05. Contiguous significant samples 

were grouped into clusters based on the predefined electrode neighborhood structure. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Model Fitting 

The MASC model assumes that multi -attribute deci sions unfold through an iterative process of sampling 

and updating beliefs about the value of attributes and options. At each step, fixation -derived information 

samples are used to update attribute -level belief distributions, which are weighted by attribut e importance 

and integrated to form higher -level option belief distributions. This Bayesian framework allows examin ing 

how a decision develops over time and generat ing predictions about the magnitude of belief updates by 

tracking how these distributions ev olve with each successive sample. 

To derive the model -generated estimates used to predict fixation -evoked activity, we first fit the 

MASC model to the behavior al data. To determine attribute weights for each participant, we used a 

general linear model to predict the participant’s option ratings from the normalized values of each 

attribute. The beta weights for each participant were normalized to ensure they summed to 1, a 

prerequisite for the model. In cases where the beta weights were negative, the values for the corresponding 

attribute were multiplied by -1. We fit the model to each participant to obtain the best -fitting estimates for 

the model’s three free parameters i.) standard deviation of sampling 

σs, ii.) increase (per fixation) of 

tolerance Δ, and iii.) sensitivity of search rule α while keeping the initial tolerance θ0 fixed to 0.1. The 

best -fitting estimates were obtained using a grid search with 31 equidistant values for each parameter (

σs:

from 0.001 to 3.001; Δ: from .01 to .09; α from 0 to 5) in which model fit was approximated with a set of 

summary statistics: the proportion of trials in which the model correctly predicted the consistency with 

which participants chose the higher value option, the difference between the observed and predi cted 

proportion of fixations to each option -attribute pair, and the difference between the observed and predicted 

number of fixations per trial. Note that the latter summary statistic was normalized by the maximum 

observed number of fixations for each part icipant to constrain the statistic to values between 0 and 1. We 

identified the best -fitting parameter set as the set with the highest mean score across these summary 

statistics .

Eye -movement recording 

Eye movements were recorded monocularly using a video -based EyeLink 1000 Plus eye tracker (SR 

Research Ltd.) with a sampling rate of 1,00 0 H z. Head position was stabilized using a chin and forehead 

rest positioned at a distance of 92 cm from the screen wit h the eye tracker in between. The eye tracker was 

calibrated at the beginning of the experiment using a 9 -point calibration layout to ensure a maximum 

calibration error of < 1.0º and recalibrated regularly throughout. For all participants, the right eye wa s

tracked. 

EEG data acquisition 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Electrophysiological data were recorded from 64 active electrodes using Brain Vision Recorder (Brain 

Products) and referenced online against Cz at a sampling rate of 100 0 H z. 63 electrodes were mounted in a 

custom layout (se e Supplementary Fig. 2) on a textile cap (ActiCap, Brain Products), while the additional 

electrode was placed infraorbitally beneath the right eye to record EOG activity. Impedances were kept 

below 2 0 k Ω. 

EEG and eye -movement preprocessing 

Preprocessing of the EEG data was performed in MATLAB R2024b (The Mathworks Inc . 2024) using the 

EEGLAB 76 toolbox and the EYE -EEG 36 plugin . A schematic diagram of the preprocessing and analysis 

pipeline is shown in Fig. 2. Both the EEG and eye tracker were originally reco rded at a sampling rate of 

100 0 H z but were downsampled offline to 50 0 H z. During the choice phase, stimulus and response onset 

triggers were sent simultaneously to both the eye tracker and EEG system, as well as triggers marking the 

start and end of the p hase (Fig . 2b) . Using the EYE -EEG toolbox, these triggers were used to synchronize 

events across the EEG and eye -tracking data. The mean synchronization error across all participants and 

events was < 2 m s.

Next, saccade and fixation events were identified and imported using the Engbert & Kliegl 

(2003) 77 algor ithm for saccade detection as implemented in the EYE -EEG toolbox. Saccades were 

identified using a velocity threshold of 5 median based standard deviations and were required to have a 

minimum duration of 5 m s. Saccades occurring within 2 5 m s of one another were merged, and only the 

first saccade of the group was retained. Fixation onset and offset were defined by the offset of the 

preceding saccade and the onset of the subsequent saccade, respectively. Time periods in which gaze fell 

outside the screen boun daries (horizontal position > 1920 or vertical position > 1080) were flagged and 

excluded from all subsequent analyses. To determine areas of interest (AOI) we defined a circular region 

(radius of 200 pixels) around each attribute location. Any fixations f alling within this region were 

recorded as fixations to the corresponding attribute, while fixations which could not be assigned to any 

AOI were discarded. 

The downsampled EEG data was initially high pass filtered at 0. 1 H z with a second -order 

Butterworth filter and subsequently re -referenced to average. Noisy channels were detected using a 

voltage threshold of five standard deviations and then spherically interpolated. To remove ocular artefacts, 

we employed an optimized ICA algorithm (OPTICAT 39 ), an approach which addresses several limitations 

of standard ICA when used with free -viewing data. In particular, standard ICA often fails to identify the 

saccadic spike potential (SP), a brief, high -frequency electromyographic signal generated by the 

extraocular muscles at saccade onset 39 . Due to its short duration (~2 0 m s), varying topography depending 

on saccade direction and relatively small amplitude compared to other ocular artefacts, it is challenging 

for conventional ICA to reliably detect and remove it. To account for the SP’s overall weak contribution 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

to the signal, the OPTICAT approach improves detection by overweig hting SPs in the training data. 

Following the recommendations provided by Dimigen (2020) 39 , the training data was band -pass filtered 

with edges 2 H z-10 0 H z before 30 ms intervals ([ -20 m s, + 10 m s]) were taken around each saccade onset 

and repeatedly appended to the EEG data until the data was twice its original length. The right EOG 

channel was included in the training data, and periods with extreme movement artefacts (>50 0 u V) were 

removed. Finally, artefactual components were flagged and later removed using an eye -tracker guided 

artefact identification algorithm 27 with a variance ratio threshold of 1.1. We also used the ICLabel 78 plugin 

to classify components and removed any re maining components that were determined as eye -related with 

more than 90% confidence. 

Linear deconvolution modeling 

Beyond the correction of ocular artefacts, two major challenges remain when studying FEPs. First, 

fixations occur in rapid succession, typically 3 -4 times per second, meaning that the neural activity elicited 

by each fixation temporally overlaps. In turn, the traditional ERP approach of extracting a window time -

locked to fixation onset does not cleanly isolate activity attributable to one event. Secondly, FEPs are 

sensitive to factors such as fixation duration and saccade amplitude 40,44 –47 . If these features are not 

appropriately controlled for, they can produce spurious effects that appear cognitive in nature. However, 

advances in the analysis of com bined EEG and eye -tracking have allowed these issues to be addressed 

simultaneously through the use of linear deconvolution modeling 37,40,42 . By assuming that the observed 

EEG ac tivity is a linear summation of activity from neighboring events, the signal can be deconvolved to 

isolate non -overlapping activity associated with the current event of interest (i.e., single fixations). 

Moreover, the dependence of fixation -evoked activity on fixation duration and saccade amplitude can be 

addressed by including these predictors as covariates in the model. Here we used deconvolution modeling 

as implemented in the Unfold.jl (v0.8.9) toolbox 37 to model fixation -evoked activity as a function of 

MASC -generated predictors, while simultaneously controlling for temporal overlap and the non -linear 

effect of saccad e amplitude and fixation duration. 

To derive the MASC -generated predictors, the model was simulated with the best fitting 

parameters. For each participant, trial, and fixation, we provided MASC with the observed fixated 

attribute and updated the model’s b elief distributions accordingly. This allowed us to obtain an estimate of 

the predicted strength of belief -updating at each fixation, given the parameterization and the participant’s 

fixation path. Within MASC, updating a belief about the value of an item is formalized as a shift in the 

(normally -distributed) posterior belief distribution and is observable at both the level of individual 

attributes ( AttUpd ) and of options ( OptUpd ). Therefore, to quantify ‘belief -updating’ at each level , we 

calculated the MASC -predicted KL -divergence between the posterior belief distribution pre ( 𝑋 𝑡 −1) and 

post ( 𝑋 𝑡 ) fixation as follows. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

𝑋𝑈𝑝𝑑 𝐾𝐿 (𝑋 𝑡 ∥ 𝑋 𝑡 −1) = ln (𝜎 𝑡 −1

𝜎 𝑡 

) + 𝜎 𝑡 −1 

> 2

+ (𝜇 𝑡 −1 − 𝜇 𝑡 )2

2𝜎 𝑡  

> 2

− 1

2

where X refers to the fixated attribute post erior in the attribute -level case and the fixated option posterior 

in the option -level case. Since KL divergence is sensitive to differences in both location and scale, this 

allowed us to jointly quantify not only changes in the belief about the average va lue of the fixated item, 

but also the corresponding change in uncertainty. 

We further hypothesized that the distance between the two option posterior distributions would 

modulate the FEPs. Prior work has demonstrated that preparatory motor signals reflect ing a developing 

propensity to respond emerge not only at the time of the final decision, but already during the processing 

of individual information samples 18 . Within the framework of MASC, the separation between option 

posteriors can be interpreted as a propensity to respond given the sampled evidence, as the stopping rule 

specifies that a choice is triggered once the overlap between option posteriors falls bel ow the tolerance 

parameter θ. Accordingly, we also calculated a third ‘Preference’ measure as the Jeffrey’s distance (i.e., 

the sum of asymmetric KL divergences) between the option posterior distributions at each fixation and 

coded it according to the opti on distribution with the currently highest posterior mean. 

Finally, while our main focus was fixat ion -evoked potentials, we also included two terms in the 

same model to account for the influence of stimulus onsets and the button -press response. Namely, w e

modelled stimulus -evoked potentials as intercepts to account for their overlap with early fixations and 

responses as a function of responding hand. 

𝑆𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑢𝑠 ~ 1

𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒 ~ 1 + 𝑐 ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒 

To further separate fixation -evoked activity from r esponse -activity, any fixations which temporally 

overlapped with the button -press response were removed from analysis (5.4% of all fixations) . The 

deconvolution models were fit to the continuous, pre -processed EEG data of each participant separately, 

befor e the resulting betas were subject to threshold -free cluster permutation tests ( E = 0.5, H = 2, N = 

5000) implemented using the ept_ANOVA toolbox 49 . In the design matrix, stimulus and fixation onsets 

were time -expanded over a window of -20 0 to 1,20 0 m s, while response onsets were time -expanded over 

a window of -100 0 to 20 0 m s. 

Data availability 

All behavior al data is publicly available at https://github.com/jordandeakin/MASC -EEG 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Code availability 

The analysis code to produce all main results and figures is publicly available at 

https://github.com/jordandeakin/MASC -EEG .

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint 28 

References 

1. Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R. & Johnson, E. J. Adaptive strategy selection in decision making. J. Exp. 

Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 14 , 534 –552 (1988). 

2. Busemeyer, J. R., Gluth, S., Rieskamp , J. & Turner, B. M. Cognitive and Neural Bases of Multi -

Attribute, Multi -Alternative, Value -based Decisions. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23 , 251 –263 (2019). 

3. Tavares, G., Perona, P. & Rangel, A. The Attentional Drift Diffusion Model of Simple Perceptual 

Decision -Making. Front. Neurosci. 11 , (2017). 

4. Ting, C. -C. & Gluth, S. High overall values mitigate gaze -related effects in perceptual and 

preferential choices. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 154 , 1320 –1333 (2025). 

5. Ting, C. -C. & Gluth, S. Unraveling information process es of decision -making with eye -tracking data. 

Front. Behav. Econ. 3, (2024). 

6. Krajbich, I., Armel, C. & Rangel, A. Visual fixations and the computation and comparison of value in 

simple choice. Nat. Neurosci. 13 , 1292 –1298 (2010). 

7. Gluth, S., Kern, N., Kortmann, M. & Vitali, C. L. Value -based attention but not divisive 

normalization influences decisions with multiple alternatives. Nat. Hum. Behav. 4, 634 –645 (2020). 

8. Shimojo, S., Simion, C., Shimojo, E. & Scheier, C. Gaze bias both reflects and influe nces preference. 

Nat. Neurosci. 6, 1317 –1322 (2003). 

9. Armel, K. C., Beaumel, A. & Rangel, A. Biasing simple choices by manipulating relative visual 

attention. Judgm. Decis. Mak. 3, 396 –403 (2008). 

10. Yang, X. & Krajbich , I. A dynamic computational model of gaze and choice in multi -attribute 

decisions. Psychol. Rev. 130 , 52 –70 (2023). 

11. Callaway, F. et al. Rational use of cognitive resources in human planning. Nat. Hum. Behav. 6, 1112 –

1125 (2022). 

12. Gabaix, X., Laibso n, D., Moloche, G. & Weinberg, S. Costly Information Acquisition: Experimental 

Analysis of a Boundedly Rational Model. Am. Econ. Rev. 96 , 1043 –1068 (2006). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

13. Noguchi, T. & Stewart, N. Multialternative Decision by Sampling: A Model of Decision Making 

Cons trained by Process Data. Psychol. Rev. 125 , 512 –544 (2018). 

14. Turner, B. M., Schley, D. R., Muller, C. & Tsetsos, K. Competing theories of multialternative, 

multiattribute preferential choice. Psychol. Rev. 125 , 329 –362 (2018). 

15. Tusche, A. & Hutcherso n, C. A. Cognitive regulation alters social and dietary choice by changing 

attribute representations in domain -general and domain -specific brain circuits. eLife 7, e31185 (2018). 

16. Maier, S. U., Raja Beharelle, A., Polanía, R., Ruff, C. C. & Hare, T. A. Dissociable mechanisms 

govern when and how strongly reward attributes affect decisions. Nat. Hum. Behav. 4, 949 –963 

(2020). 

17. Krueger, P. M., Callaway, F., Gul, S., Griffiths, T. L. & Lieder, F. Identifying resource -rational 

heuristics for risky choice. Psychol. Rev. 131 , 905 –951 (2024). 

18. Gluth, S., Rieskamp, J. & Büchel, C. Classic EEG motor potentials track the emergence of value -

based decisions. NeuroImage 79 , 394 –403 (2013). 

19. Pisauro, M. A., Fouragnan, E., Retzler, C. & Philiastides, M. G. Neura l correlates of evidence 

accumulation during value -based decisions revealed via simultaneous EEG -fMRI. Nat. Commun. 8,

15808 (2017). 

20. Polanía, R., Krajbich, I., Grueschow, M. & Ruff, C. C. Neural oscillations and synchronization 

differentially support e vidence accumulation in perceptual and value -based decision making. Neuron 

82 , 709 –720 (2014). 

21. Hunt, L. T. et al. Mechanisms underlying cortical activity during value -guided choice. Nat. Neurosci. 

15 , 470 -S3 (2012). 

22. Hunt, L. T. et al. Triple dissociation of attention and decision computations across prefrontal cortex. 

Nat. Neurosci. 21 , 1471 –1481 (2018). 

23. Hunt, L. T., Dolan, R. J. & Behrens, T. E. J. Hierarchical competitions subserving multi -attribute 

choice. Nat. Neurosci. 17 , 161 3–1622 (2014). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

24. Perkins, A. Q., Gillis, Z. S. & Rich, E. L. Multiattribute Decision -making in Macaques Relies on 

Direct Attribute Comparisons. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 36 , 1879 –1897 (2024). 

25. Mohr, P. N. C., Heekeren, H. R. & Rieskamp, J. Attraction Effect in Risky Choice Can Be Explained 

by Subjective Distance Between Choice Alternatives. Sci. Rep. 7, 8942 (2017). 

26. Gluth, S., Hotaling, J. M. & Rieskamp, J. The Attraction Effect Modulates Reward Prediction Errors 

and Intertemporal Choices. J. Neurosci. 37 , 371 –382 (2017). 

27. Plöchl, M., Ossandón, J. P. & König, P. Combining EEG and eye tracking: identification, 

characterization, and correction of eye movement artifacts in electroencephalographic data. Front. 

Hum. Neurosci. 6, (2012). 

28. Luck, S. J. An In troduction to the Event -Related Potential Technique, Second Edition . (MIT Press, 

2014). 

29. Gluth, S., Deakin, J. & Rieskamp, J. A theory of multiattribute search and choice. Psychol. Rev. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000614 (2026) doi:10.1037/rev0000614. 

30. Vlaev, I., Chater, N., Stewart, N. & Brown, G. D. A. Does the brain calculate value? Trends Cogn. 

Sci. 15 , 546 –554 (2011). 

31. Hayden, B. Y. & Niv, Y. The case against economic values in the orbitofrontal cortex (or anywhere 

else in the brain). Behav. N eurosci. 135 , 192 –201 (2021). 

32. Westbrook, A. et al. Dopamine Promotes Cognitive Effort by Biasing the Benefits Versus Costs of 

Cognitive Work. Science 367 , 1362 –1366 (2020). 

33. Ursu, R., Erdem, T., Wang, Q. & Zhang, Q. P. Prior Information and Consumer Search: Evidence 

from Eye -Tracking. SSRN Scholarly Paper at https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4113480 (2023). 

34. Rieskamp, J. & Hoffrage, U. Inferences under time pressure: How opportunity costs affect strategy 

selection. Acta Psychol. (Amst.) 127 , 258 –276 (2 008). 

35. Sepulveda, P. et al. Visual attention modulates the integration of goal -relevant evidence and not 

value. eLife 9, e60705 (2020). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

36. Dimigen, O., Sommer, W., Hohlfeld, A., Jacobs, A. M. & Kliegl, R. Coregistration of eye movements 

and EEG in natu ral reading: analyses and review. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 140 , 552 –572 (2011). 

37. Ehinger, B. V. & Dimigen, O. Unfold: an integrated toolbox for overlap correction, non -linear 

modeling, and regression -based EEG analysis. PeerJ 7, e7838 (2019). 

38. Plöchl , M., Ossandón, J. P. & König, P. Combining EEG and eye tracking: identification, 

characterization, and correction of eye movement artifacts in electroencephalographic data. Front. 

Hum. Neurosci. 6, (2012). 

39. Dimigen, O. Optimizing the ICA -based removal of ocular EEG artifacts from free viewing 

experiments. NeuroImage 207 , 116117 (2020). 

40. Dimigen, O. & Ehinger, B. V. Regression -based analysis of combined EEG and eye -tracking data: 

Theory and applications. J. Vis. 21 , 3 (2021). 

41. Payne, J. W. Task com plexity and contingent processing in decision making: An information search 

and protocol analysis. Organ. Behav. Hum. Perform. 16 , 366 –387 (1976). 

42. Smith, N. J. & Kutas, M. Regression -based estimation of ERP waveforms: I. The rERP framework. 

Psychophysi ology 52 , 157 –168 (2015). 

43. Smith, N. J. & Kutas, M. Regression -based estimation of ERP waveforms: II. Nonlinear effects, 

overlap correction, and practical considerations. Psychophysiology 52 , 169 –181 (2015). 

44. Armington , J. C. & Bloom, M. B. Relations between the amplitudes of spontaneous saccades and 

visual responses. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 64 , 1263 –1271 (1974). 

45. Kaunitz, L. N. et al. Looking for a face in the crowd: Fixation -related potentials in an eye -movement 

visual se arch task. NeuroImage 89 , 297 –305 (2014). 

46. Ries, A. J., Slayback, D. & Touryan, J. The fixation -related lambda response: Effects of saccade 

magnitude, spatial frequency, and ocular artifact removal. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 134 , 1 –8 (2018). 

47. Skukies, R ., Schepers, J. & Ehinger, B. Brain responses vary in duration -modeling strategies and 

challenges. Imaging Neurosci. 3, IMAG.a.1003 (2025). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

48. Smith, S. M. & Nichols, T. E. Threshold -free cluster enhancement: Addressing problems of 

smoothing, threshold de pendence and localisation in cluster inference. NeuroImage 44 , 83 –98 (2009). 

49. Mensen, A. & Khatami, R. Advanced EEG analysis using threshold -free cluster -enhancement and 

non -parametric statistics. NeuroImage 67 , 111 –118 (2013). 

50. Mars, R. B. et al. Tr ial -by -Trial Fluctuations in the Event -Related Electroencephalogram Reflect 

Dynamic Changes in the Degree of Surprise. J. Neurosci. 28 , 12539 –12545 (2008). 

51. Polich, J. Updating P300: An integrative theory of P3a and P3b. Clin. Neurophysiol. 118 , 2128 –21 48 

(2007). 

52. Kolossa, A., Kopp, B. & Fingscheidt, T. A computational analysis of the neural bases of Bayesian 

inference. NeuroImage 106 , 222 –237 (2015). 

53. Bennett, D., Murawski, C. & Bode, S. Single -Trial Event -Related Potential Correlates of Belief 

Up dating. eNeuro 2, ENEURO.0076 -15.2015 (2015). 

54. O’Connell, R. G., Dockree, P. M. & Kelly, S. P. A supramodal accumulation -to -bound signal that 

determines perceptual decisions in humans. Nat. Neurosci. 15 , 1729 –1735 (2012). 

55. Kelly, S. P. & O’Connell, R . G. Internal and External Influences on the Rate of Sensory Evidence 

Accumulation in the Human Brain. J. Neurosci. 33 , 19434 –19441 (2013). 

56. Parés -Pujolràs, E., Kelly, S. P. & Murphy, P. R. Dissociable encoding of evolving beliefs and 

momentary belief u pdates in distinct neural decision signals. Nat. Commun. 16 , 3922 (2025). 

57. Kornhuber, H. H. & Deecke, L. Hirnpotentialänderungen bei Willkürbewegungen und passiven 

Bewegungen des Menschen: Bereitschaftspotential und reafferente Potentiale. Pflüg. Arch. Für 

Gesamte Physiol. Menschen Tiere 284 , 1 –17 (1965). 

58. Siems, M., Cao, Y., Tohidi -Moghaddam, M., Donner, T. H. & Tsetsos, K. Rhythmic sampling of 

multiple decision alternatives in the human brain. Nat. Commun. 17 , 1587 (2026). 

59. O’Reilly, J. X. et al. Dissociable effects of surprise and model update in parietal and anterior 

cingulate cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110 , E3660 –E3669 (2013). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

60. Volpe, U. et al. The cortical generators of P3a and P3b: a LORETA study. Brain Res. Bull. 73 , 220 –

230 (2007). 

61. Twomey, D. M., Murphy, P. R., Kelly, S. P. & O’Connell, R. G. The classic P300 encodes a build -to -

threshold decision variable. Eur. J. Neurosci. 42 , 1636 –1643 (2015). 

62. van Vugt, M. K., Beulen, M. A. & Taatgen, N. A. Relation between centro -parietal positivity and 

diffusion model parameters in both perceptual and memory -based decision making. Brain Res. 1715 ,

1–12 (2019). 

63. Hare, T. A., Schultz, W., Camerer, C. F., O’Doherty, J. P. & Rangel, A. Transformation of stimulus 

value signals into motor commands during simple choice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108 , 18120 –18125 

(2011). 

64. Rangel, A. & Hare, T. Neural computations associated with goal -directed choice. Curr. Opin. 

Neurobiol. 20 , 262 –270 (2010). 

65. Ratcliff, R., Philiastides, M. G. & Saj da, P. Quality of evidence for perceptual decision making is 

indexed by trial -to -trial variability of the EEG. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 , 6539 –6544 (2009). 

66. Wyart, V., de Gardelle, V., Scholl, J. & Summerfield, C. Rhythmic Fluctuations in Evid ence 

Accumulation during Decision Making in the Human Brain. Neuron 76 , 847 –858 (2012). 

67. Proudfit, G. H. The reward positivity: From basic research on reward to a biomarker for depression. 

Psychophysiology 52 , 449 –459 (2015). 

68. Brown, D. R., Jackson, T. C. J. & Cavanagh, J. F. The reward positivity is sensitive to affective 

liking. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 22 , 258 –267 (2022). 

69. Cavanagh, J. F. & Holroyd, C. B. The Reward Positivity signals a goal prediction error. Trends Cogn. 

Sci. S1364 -6613(25)00313 –4 (2026) doi:10.1016/j.tics.2025.11.005. 

70. Frömer, R., Stürmer, B. & Sommer, W. The better, the bigger: The effect of graded positive 

performance feedback on the reward positivity. Biol. Psychol. 114 , 61 –68 (2016). 

71. Fröm er, R., Dean Wolf, C. K. & Shenhav, A. Goal congruency dominates reward value in accounting 

for behavioral and neural correlates of value -based decision -making. Nat. Commun. 10 , 4926 (2019). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

72. Niefind, F. & Dimigen, O. Dissociating parafoveal preview ben efit and parafovea -on -fovea effects 

during reading: A combined eye tracking and EEG study. Psychophysiology 53 , 1784 –1798 (2016). 

73. Coco, M. I., Nuthmann, A. & Dimigen, O. Fixation -related Brain Potentials during Semantic 

Integration of Object -Scene Info rmation. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 32 , 571 –589 (2020). 

74. Spektor, M. S., Bhatia, S. & Gluth, S. The elusiveness of context effects in decision making. Trends 

Cogn. Sci. 25 , 843 –854 (2021). 

75. Emily R. Weichart et al. A model of dynamic, within -trial conflict r esolution for decision making. 

Psychol. Rev. 127 , 749 –777 (2020). 

76. Delorme, A. & Makeig, S. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single -trial EEG 

dynamics including independent component analysis. J. Neurosci. Methods 134 , 9 –21 (2004). 

77. Eng bert, R. & Kliegl, R. Microsaccades uncover the orientation of covert attention. Vision Res. 43 ,

1035 –1045 (2003). 

78. Pion -Tonachini, L., Kreutz -Delgado, K. & Makeig, S. ICLabel: An automated 

electroencephalographic independent component classifier, datas et, and website. NeuroImage 198 ,

181 –197 (2019). 

Acknowledgements/Funding 

We than k Izel Habil, Changfa Fu and Amir Hossein Hadian Rasanan for help with data collection and the 

Cognitive Modelling & Decision Neuroscience team at the University of Hamburg for many insightful 

discussions. This work was supported by a collaborative research grant, co -funded by the German 

Research Foundation / Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; grant no. GL 984/1 -1) and a 

collaborative research grant, co -funded by the German Ministry of Education and Research / 

Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF; grant no. 01GQ2303). S.G. also acknowledges 

support by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 

innovation program (Grant agreement No. 948545. 

Author contributions 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738682 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

J.D. and S.G. conceptualized the s tudy and developed the theoretical framework. J.D. designed and 

programmed the task and collected and analyzed the data. R.F. contributed to EEG methodology, task 

design, data analysis, and interpretation of the results. J.D. wrote the original draft of th e manuscript. S.G. 

and R.F. reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors contributed conceptual input. S.G. supervised 

the project and acquired funding. 

Competing Interests 

All authors declare no competing interests.