Title: Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.12406v1

Published Time: Mon, 16 Feb 2026 01:11:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality 

# Mohammad Raihanul Bashar 

Department of Computer Science & Software Engineering Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada mohammadraihanul.bashar@mail.concordia.ca 

# Aunnoy K Mutasim 

School of Interactive Arts + Technology (SIAT) Simon Fraser University Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada amutasim@sfu.ca 

# Ken Pfeuffer 

Department of Computer Science Aarhus University Aarhus, Denmark ken@cs.au.dk 

# Anil Ufuk Batmaz 

Department of Computer Science & Software Engineering Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada ufuk.batmaz@concordia.ca 

Figure 1: Overview of the mode-switching and subselection techniques for multi-selection in extended reality (XR). We used three pinch states based on the distance (d) between the index and thumb fingertips: Full-Pinch (d < 2 cm), Semi-Pinch (2 cm ≤ d

≤ 7 cm), and Release (d > 7 cm). We used two mode-switching strategies — Quasi (FullPinch and SemiPinch ) and Persistent 

(DoublePinch and Voice ). For subselection, we used Gaze+Dwell ( gD ), Gaze+Pinch ( gP ), and Gaze+Voice ( gV ). 

## Abstract 

Interacting with multiple objects simultaneously makes us fast. A pre-step to this interaction is to select the objects, i.e., multi-object selection, which is enabled through two steps: (1) toggling multi-selection mode — mode-switching — and then (2) selecting all the intended objects — subselection. In extended reality (XR), each step can be performed with the eyes, hands, and voice. To examine how design choices affect user performance, we evaluated four mode-switching ( SemiPinch , FullPinch , DoublePinch , and 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

CHI ’26, Barcelona, Spain 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM https://doi.org/10.1145/3772318.3790513 

Voice ) and three subselection techniques (Gaze+Dwell, Gaze+Pinch, and Gaze+Voice) in a user study. Results revealed that while Dou-blePinch paired with Gaze+Pinch yielded the highest overall per-formance, SemiPinch achieved the lowest performance. Although 

Voice -based mode-switching showed benefits, Gaze+Voice subse-lection was less favored, as the required repetitive vocal commands were perceived as tedious. Overall, these findings provide empirical insights and inform design recommendations for multi-selection techniques in XR. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Interaction techniques ; Vir-tual reality ; Empirical studies in interaction design .

## Keywords 

Extended Reality, Multi-Selection, Eye Gaze, Pinch, Double-Pinch, Semi-Pinch, Voice   

> arXiv:2602.12406v1 [cs.HC] 12 Feb 2026 CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain Bashar et al.
> ACM Reference Format:
> Mohammad Raihanul Bashar, Aunnoy K Mutasim, Ken Pfeuffer, and Anil Ufuk Batmaz. 2026. Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality. In Proceedings of CHI ’26: The ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26).
> ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3772318.3790513

## 1 Introduction 

Multi-object selection techniques enable faster manipulation of multiple items together, such as files, images, or documents. While multi-object selection is well understood in 2D interfaces, the spa-tial interaction afforded by extended reality (XR) introduces new challenges [ 48 , 98 ]. Different from desktop or touchscreen, many XR systems are designed to work without controllers, and instead, in-teraction is supported through modalities such as hands, (eye) gaze, and voice. This opens up a large design space. Yet, little is known about how the two fundamental components of multi-selection — 

mode-switching (i.e., changing between single- or multi-selection states) and subselection (i.e., selecting targets to group together) — and their combinations affect users’ performance in XR. Two types of mode-switching approaches are employed in the literature: quasi- and persistent-mode . In quasi-mode, users must continuously hold an “action” to maintain multi-selection, e.g., holding the SHIFT/CTRL key on a keyboard or using (two-finger) tap-(hold)-and-drag on a touchscreen. Quasi-mode can improve mode awareness (i.e., users better remember which mode they are in), but often increases fatigue, and is thus less suitable for longer tasks [ 26 ]. In contrast, persistent-mode is explicitly triggered and released, such as toggling a button (e.g., CAPS LOCK), or tapping-and-holding the first desired object on an Android touchscreen [ 14 ,71 , 79 ]. Persistent-mode frees up degrees of freedom, allowing users to focus on subselection rather than sustaining a quasi-mode action. Translating such 2D practices into XR is not straightforward. For instance, quasi-modes with hand gestures can become sustained mid-air hand poses that are fatiguing [ 38 , 45 ] and prone to tracking instability [ 4 ]. In contrast, while persistent-modes may affect mode awareness (i.e., the user’s ability to perceive and understand the system’s current operational state and the actions it affords), it could potentially be improved with XR’s richer feedback channels, e.g., visual, haptic, and auditory [ 83 ]. Prior work in XR individu-ally studied switching techniques with the dominant/nondominant hand (DH / NDH) [ 67 , 92 ], eye gaze [ 74 , 75 ], or voice [ 12 , 84 ]. Op-tions for subselection include gaze pointing with dwell [ 23 , 50 ], pinch [ 59 , 74 ], and voice [ 66 , 106 ]. To date, only one multi-selection work [ 42 ] studied semi-pinch alongside gaze as a quasi-mode for a small number of targets (2-6 targets). Thus, it is unclear whether their results scale to a larger number of targets, which in turn would amplify mode-switching and therefore, multi-selection costs. To explore multi-selection performance in XR, we ask the fol-lowing research questions — RQ1: How do controller-free quasi-and persistent-mode-switching strategies affect user performance for multi-selection in XR? RQ2: How do pinch-based mode-switching techniques extend to a larger number of targets for multi-selection? 

RQ3: How do different combinations of mode-switching and subs-election techniques, such as gaze+pinch or hands-free methods like voice and dwell, influence multi-selection performance in XR? To answer these, our user study compares four mode-switching tech-niques: two Quasi (FullPinch and SemiPinch ) and two Persis-tent (DoublePinch and Voice ), and three subselection techniques: Gaze+Dwell ( gD ), Gaze+Pinch ( gP ), and Gaze+Voice ( gV ), to multi-select 6, 8, or 10 targets (Figure 1). Results revealed: 

• Participants switched mode faster with Quasi -mode tech-niques. Yet, Persistent -mode, especially DoublePinch , con-sistently outperformed other switching techniques in terms of task completion time, error rate, and efficiency. 

• DoublePinch paired with gP resulted in the best task com-pletion time, error rate, and overall efficiency. 

• SemiPinch produced the highest mode and selection error rate, and the lowest efficiency. Moreover, it was rated as most fatiguing, least usable, and showed the highest decline in efficiency with increasing targets. 

• 17 and 15 of 30 participants preferred DoublePinch mode-switching and gD subselection technique, respectively. Our contributions include: (1) a systematic empirical analysis of all the combinations of four mode-switching and three subselec-tion techniques, informing design recommendations for gaze-based multi-selection of moderate to large target sets in XR, (2) showing that Persistent -DoublePinch is the most effective among the four investigated mode-switching techniques, and DoublePinch with gP 

outperformed other alternatives, and (3) demonstrating that Quasi -

SemiPinch is not a viable mode-switching option. 

## 2 Related Work 

Multi-selection can follow either a serial or a parallel workflow. Serial selection incrementally confirms objects one-by-one [ 45 , 48 ,97 , 98 ], while parallel selection defines a region (e.g., lasso) that selects multiple objects at once [ 85 , 98 , 104 ]. Regardless of approach, users must first switch from single- to multi-selection mode, making mode-switching a core component of multi-selection. 

## 2.1 Mode-Switching in XR 

With controllers, mode-switching has been studied via buttons or menus [ 18 , 98 ], and is nowadays established in applications [ 1 , 20 ,53 ]. For example, ShapeLab requires pressing a menu button to open a panel, selecting a multi-selection tool (brush, marquee, or ring), and then performing grouping with ray-based pointing and controller trigger input. Aside from controllers, different hands-free alternatives have also been studied, for instance, head gestures and variations such as nodding [ 105 ], translation, and roll [ 85 ]. Yet, dis-tinguishing intentional from natural head movements is challeng-ing [ 29 ], camera-coupled rotations increase cybersickness risk [ 65 ], and repeated/exaggerated motions cause physical strain [ 90 ]. Voice is also considered a promising hands-free approach as it reduces physical gestures, fatigue, and offers ergonomic benefits [ 62 ]. While recognition latency remains a challenge, recent studies report ac-ceptable recognition accuracy for typical XR tasks [ 39 , 40 , 62 , 93 ], which motivated us to include it in our study. Hand gestures are intuitive and a prime candidate for mode-switching. Surale et al. [ 92 ] compared DH vs. NDH, finding NDH faster and more accurate. Smith et al. [ 89 ] reported similar findings, with follow-up work confirming scalability across tasks [ 88 ]. These results suggest that assigning mode-switch to the NDH improves Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain 

performance, freeing up the DH for precise actions. Thus, in our work, we used the NDH for mode-switching. However, prior work also shows that complex or sustained mid-air gestures can lead to fatigue and interfere with fine manipulation [ 82 ]. In contrast, minimal gestures, such as a pinch, remain practical and efficient, motivating us to study this gesture further. For 2D user interfaces (UIs), Pfeuffer et al. [ 72 ] explored gaze with pen interactions and demonstrated use cases for a potential multimodal mode-switching mechanism. Fleischhauer et al. [ 30 ]found that gaze enables efficient, low-effort switching, and com-bining gaze fixation with a manual trigger improves robustness. In XR, Kim et al. [ 42 ] adopted a similar multimodal approach within the gaze+pinch paradigm, introducing semi-pinch , a Quasi -mode multi-selection technique for small sets of targets (2, 4, and 6). They defined semi-pinch as a state “on the way to” a full-pinch, with final confirmation or end of multi-selection triggered by a full-pinch gesture. They compared five subselection techniques and found no significant differences in completion time. Nonetheless, semi-pinch combined with Swipe or Dwell was most preferred, and semi-pinch and Swipe yielded fewer errors. Yet, semi-pinch was not compared with other mode-switching techniques. While a subset of our study directly builds on their work [ 42 ], here we also investigate semi-pinch alongside additional mode-switching techniques and evaluate its behavior when scaled to a larger number of targets. 

## 2.2 (Sub)Selection Techniques for Gaze-Based Systems 

In point-select tasks, users instinctively direct their gaze toward objects of interest [ 46 , 51 , 59 , 77 ]. Although gaze is fast [ 2 ], it lacks an explicit confirmation signal, leading to the Midas Touch problem, where mere looking may trigger unintended selections [ 34 , 35 , 70 ]. Thus, researchers have explored several selection techniques to complement interaction with gaze, e.g., [ 11 , 16 , 47 , 59 , 64 ]. However, 

dwell still remains the most common solution to date [ 57 ], where a target is confirmed by maintaining gaze on it for a fixed duration [ 23 ,50 ]. While a range of dwell durations has been explored [ 57 , 59 , 102 ], dwell still suffers from issues like latency and error [42, 69, 87]. In contrast, hand gestures relatively better complement gaze as they provide more expressive and deliberate control that bal-ances gaze’s rapid but implicit pointing [ 7 , 31 ]. This multimodal combination, where the eyes target and the hands confirm, has demonstrated strong potential across a wide range of interaction paradigms [ 11 , 35 , 59 , 71 , 72 , 103 ]. Gaze and hand now support tasks such as one-handed menu control [ 76 ], 3D sketching [ 3], and accessibility [ 86 ], with the gaze+pinch model emerging as a key interaction paradigm within this design space [59, 73, 74]. Voice has also been explored as a confirmation modality. Un-like pinch, voice is hands-free, eliminates mid-air arm fatigue, and other related issues like gesture ambiguity and hand-tracking noise [ 54 ]. Prior work showed that voice can be used to confirm selections [ 66 , 77 , 106 ], issue commands in gaze-directed interac-tion [ 41 ], or enhance accessibility for users with limited motor control [ 15 , 106 ]. These advantages make voice a practical option for subselection in XR. 

## 3 Design and Implementation of Multi-Selection Techniques 3.1 Rationale for Chosen Techniques 

3.1.1 Multi-Selection Techniques. Our goal is not to propose novel solutions, but to systematically evaluate representative controller-free mode-switching and subselection strategies that are supported and widely adopted in current commercial XR platforms for gaze-based multi-selection. To identify suitable options, we reviewed interaction literature across barehand XR and multimodal selection, and focused on methods that (1) require no external devices or UI widgets, (2) are already supported in commercial headsets (Meta Quest, HoloLens, Vision Pro), (3) use natural, low-learning gestures, and (4) can be executed continuously during mid-air interactions. Thus, we selected FullPinch and SemiPinch , representing the 

Quasi forms of mid-air clutching [ 42 , 74 ], where a continuous ges-ture maintains the mode. DoublePinch is chosen as a Persistent 

alternative because double-tap and double-pinch are widely used, easy to learn, and can be reliably detected [ 17 , 96 ]. Although not a sensorimotor equivalent to pinch-based approaches, Voice is chosen for pragmatic reasons as it is now native on major com-mercial virtual reality (VR) headsets and augmented reality (AR) glasses, and provides a convenient hands-free modality for Persis-tent option [ 66 , 106 ]. We excluded techniques that rely on digital menus [ 75 ], surface contact [ 30 , 71 , 72 ], wearable devices [ 44 , 101 ], or micro-gestures [ 84 ], as these either require additional hardware, introduce fatigue, or impose high learning and memorization costs that make them less suitable for sustained freehand interaction. For subselection, we selected Dwell , Pinch , and Voice as they represent the three dominant confirmation modalities in gaze-based XR: gaze-only [ 50 ], hand-gesture [ 59 ], and voice commands [ 106 ]. These three cover distinct trade-offs in effort, speed, and error control, and are directly comparable as all three complement gaze pointing well. 

3.1.2 Serial Multi-Selection. Parallel multi-selection techniques perform best when desired targets are (densely) clustered. However, such clustering is not representative of general multi-selection scenarios, where targets are typically scattered and/or surrounded by distractors, e.g., selecting files/images to upload to social media. In such cases, especially for a relatively moderate number of targets (e.g., ≤ 10 ) [ 98 ], serial methods are more suitable. Thus, we decided to investigate serial grouping for moderate target counts to explore more realistic use cases. 

3.1.3 Bimanual Multi-Selection. Instead of introducing unfamiliar gesture vocabularies, we chose pinch-based interactions because they are already widely used in XR systems and require minimal learning effort. For example, a single pinch with the DH naturally maps to single-object selection, while a bimanual pinch is often used for transformations such as resizing or rotating [ 10 , 27 ]. Replacing pinch with new gestures would increase the learning burden by forcing users to learn an additional gesture vocabulary [ 42 , 84 ]. In-stead, we adopt a bimanual interaction approach that complements gaze — the NDH defines spatial context (e.g., mode, frame, scale), while the DH executes precise operations such as selection, transla-tion, or rotation. This design is grounded in Guiard’s [ 21 ] kinematic-chain model of asymmetric hand roles, which has repeatedly shown CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain Bashar et al. 

efficiency and fluidity gains in compound Human-Computer Inter-action (HCI) tasks. Accordingly, we place mode-switching actions in the NDH and familiar pinch gestures on the DH for subselection. 

## 3.2 Mode-Switching Techniques 

Among the four chosen techniques, three are based on the gaze+ pinch interaction paradigm [ 73 ] ( FullPinch , SemiPinch , and Dou-blePinch ) while one leverages a hands-free modality ( Voice ). Fol-lowing prior work [ 88 , 89 , 92 ], we assigned all the pinch variants to the NDH. More details about all the techniques are provided below: 

FullPinch . This technique requires the user to maintain a full-pinch, i.e., pinch and hold, to activate and sustain multi-selection mode. A pinch is detected when the thumb and index fingertips’ distance is < 2 𝑐𝑚 (Figure 1). When the pinch is released (or the system loses recognition of the pinch gesture), i.e., when the two fingertips’ distance is > 7 𝑐𝑚 , the system waits 250 𝑚𝑠 , before deactivating the mode and finalizing the group. The 250 𝑚𝑠 gap was chosen based on the touchscreen multi-selection touch-dwell approach [33] to prevent errors due to tracking issues. 

SemiPinch . Following Kim et al.’s design [ 42 ], multi-selection is activated when the distance between thumb and index fingertips is within 2–7 𝑐𝑚 (Figure 1). The grouping is finalized with a full-pinch, after which the system waits 250 𝑚𝑠 before ending the trial. Similar to existing, familiar, and realistic Quasi multi-selection behavior on 2D devices, where an accidental key release or momentary loss of touch input reverts the interaction to single-selection mode, our system also returns to single-selection when the semi-pinch gesture is (unintentionally) released (i.e., > 7 𝑐𝑚 ). Matching established conventions, we also designed the single-selection mode to revert any previously selected object(s) to their default state upon each new selection. Importantly, however, the trial itself remains open and is not terminated. Further, to minimize the effects of unintended mode changes, we provided color-coded visual feedback indicating the current selection mode (see Figure 2 and Section 4.1) throughout the interaction. This design choice somewhat enables users to notice and recover from silent mode drops. 

DoublePinch . A double-pinch [ 17 ] is recognized when a full-pinch is released and performed again within 350 𝑚𝑠 of the first pinch (Figure 1). Another double-pinch deactivates the mode, thus finalizing the selected group. The 350 𝑚𝑠 interval was chosen based on pilot studies and prior work that suggest a range of 

300 –400 𝑚𝑠 [60 , 96 ] to balance speed and reliability. During pi-lots, shorter intervals led to missed activations, while longer ones increased false positives. 

Voice . Following prior work [ 81 ], the vocabulary was chosen to be short, unambiguous, and semantically distinct to minimize voice recognition errors. Participants could choose from a small set of activation words ( group , multi , batch , multimode ) to activate multi-selection, and distinct terms ( complete , done , single , finish ) to deactivate and finalize the group. Enabling users to select the phrase most natural to them could potentially reduce cognitive load, while ensuring commands were concise and disjoint enough to avoid misrecognition. Longer or ambiguous utterances (e.g., “switch”) were deliberately excluded, as they have been shown to increase recognition latency and frustration [94]. 

Other Techniques Considered. A single NDH pinch (and release) 

could act as a Persistent toggle, but pilot testing revealed that users often got confused and struggled to distinguish NDH pinch for mode-switching from DH pinch for subselection. This confusion was most prominent at mode exit, which increased errors, cognitive load, and task completion time. Another candidate was a Quasi 

voice mode (sustained vocalization), such as humming [25], which was also discarded as it is fatiguing [ 81 ]. We also excluded single modality switching via menu UIs [1 , 20 , 53 ], since single modalities disrupt the natural eye–hand division of labor [28, 74]. 

## 3.3 Subselection Techniques 

Gaze+Dwell ( gD ). To select an object, the user’s gaze cursor has to maintain fixation on the object for 450 𝑚𝑠 [ 23 , 70 ]. The dwell duration was chosen based on a pilot and prior work [ 42 , 57 , 58 , 78 ]. 

Gaze+Pinch ( gP ). A full-pinch with the DH selects the object that the user’s gaze cursor is on [59, 74]. 

Gaze+Voice ( gV ). The user gazes at the target and then issues a spoken command to select it. As above, we again used a small set of unique commands ( select , add , pick , choose , take ). 

## 4 User Study 

To assess the performance of the multi-selection techniques, and following established XR study guidelines [ 6], we designed a user study within a scattered serial target grouping task [ 42 , 48 , 98 ]. We did not use Fitts’ law [ 4, 23 ] or other single-target pointing tasks (e.g., [ 13 , 56 ]), since our objective was to evaluate naturalistic multi-selection performance and not isolated pointing. To avoid confounds such as depth perception, occlusion, and spatial search, targets were arranged in a 2D grid placed within a 3D VR environ-ment, allowing performance differences to be primarily attributed directly to mode-switching and subselection. This controlled layout is consistent with prior multi-selection research [ 48 , 84 , 98 ], which typically investigates simplified spatial arrangements and the core interaction mechanism first before moving on to complex scenarios. For similar reasons, we also did not investigate deselection, i.e., reselecting an already selected object to remove it from the current group. We argue that deselection is the same motor interaction as selection, and is thus the same underlying mechanism rather than a distinct operation in serial multi-selection. Moreover, as we designed our task to visually show correctly (green) and incorrectly (red) selected objects (see Figure 2), we somewhat reduced the cog-nitive confound involved in identifying the need for deselection. Also, we did not deem it suitable to explore scrolling or navigation actions, as they constitute fundamentally different interaction pro-cesses. Still, to preserve ecological variability while maintaining experimental repeatability, we randomize target positions across trials similar to prior work [6, 48, 98]. 

## 4.1 Experimental Task 

As serial multi-selection is more suitable for selecting small to mod-erate number of targets, we chose to present 6, 8, or 10 orange targets in a single trial. The rest of the objects in the 5 × 10 flat rectangular grid were colored in white and acted as distractors. To provide visual feedback, when a participant’s gaze landed on an object, it turned teal. Correctly selected targets changed to green, Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain 

Figure 2: The experimental task with the mode (top-left) and subselection (top-right) indicators. 

while incorrect selections changed the distractors to red. The cur-rent selection mode was shown in the top-left corner of the grid and was color-coded: “Multi” selection appeared in yellow, while “Single” appeared in white. Also, a subselection indicator was shown in the top-right corner as visual feedback (see Figure 2). Each trial began with an inter-trial interval scene containing a “Start” button at arm’s reach, which participants tapped with their finger to start the trial. Participants were then instructed to group all orange targets while avoiding distractors, and explicitly told to prioritize accuracy over speed. This design choice parallels real-world tasks, where the cost of incomplete or incorrect grouping outweighs that of minor delays. The grid was placed 10 𝑚 in front of the participants. Objects were evenly spaced with a edge-to-edge gap of 2.86 ◦, and the entire grid was 28 .07 ◦ × 14 .81 ◦. Each sphere had a diameter of 2.30 ◦;however, to compensate for minor inaccuracies in eye tracking, invisible colliders were enlarged 1.5 times, i.e., to 3.45 ◦, following prior work [42, 49]. 

## 4.2 Experimental Design 

We implemented a within-subjects design with three independent variables — mode-switching (DoublePinch , FullPinch , SemiP-inch , and Voice ), subselection (gD , gP , and gV ), and, to vary task difficulty and enable analysis of scalability effects, number of targets (6, 8, or 10). Each participant completed all combina-tions, with three trial repetitions per condition, resulting in a total of 4𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒 −𝑠𝑤𝑖𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔 × 3𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 × 3#𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡𝑠 × 3𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 = 108 tri-als per participant. To mitigate order effects, the conditions were counterbalanced using a Latin Square design. 

## 4.3 Apparatus 

The study was implemented in Unity (6000.0.45f1) for the Meta Quest Pro VR headset, which features 90 𝐻𝑧 refresh rate, 106 ◦

horizontal field-of-view, integrated with eye trackers sampling at 

72 𝐻𝑧 [ 80 ]. Gaze and hand-based interactions were implemented using the Meta XR All-in-One SDK (v74.0.1) and were smoothed using a 1 € Filter [ 9]. Pinch was detected using the Meta Hand Pose Detection SDK, which also tracks fingertip distances. For voice recognition, we used the open-source Vosk speech recognition toolkit 1 (Kaldi-based) [ 63 ], integrated into Unity via the Meta XR Voice SDK for microphone access. The toolkit was run locally on-device to reduce recognition latency. 

> 1Vosk speech recognition toolkit: https://github.com/alphacep/vosk-api

We measured interaction latency for both pinch and voice input in early pilots. End-to-end pinch detection latency was quantified using high-speed video recording ( ≥ 240 fps) of participants per-forming pinch gestures while an immediate visual response was triggered by the system upon detection. Latency was computed as the difference between the first video frame capturing the physical thumb–index contact (gesture onset) and the first frame show-ing the corresponding system response. Using this method, pinch events (full-pinch and release) were recognized within 30-50 𝑚𝑠 

from gesture onset, matching previous work [19]. Voice latency of about 120-150 𝑚𝑠 was measured from speech onset to the corresponding system response [ 99 ]. Speech onset was identified as the first audio frame exceeding the recognizer’s voice-activity detection threshold, and system response was defined as the frame in which the command triggered a visible state change. 

## 4.4 Participants 

We recruited 30 participants for the study (16 female, 14 male; 𝑀 𝐴𝑔𝑒 

= 26.4, 𝑆𝐷 𝐴𝑔𝑒 = 2.40). 26 were right-handed, and 4 were left-handed. 9 wore glasses, 2 used contact lenses, and 2 had undergone vision correction surgery. Participants came from varied backgrounds, including engineering, advertising, and customer service, providing a broad range of perspectives. They self-rated their familiarity with AR/VR/XR on a 6-point Likert scale (0 = no experience, 5 = expert), reporting moderate overall experience ( 𝑀 = 3.50, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.04). By modality, experience was highest with controllers ( 𝑀 = 3.86, 𝑆𝐷 

= 1.07), followed by hand interactions ( 𝑀 = 2.30, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.95), gaze (𝑀 = 1.96, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.79), and voice ( 𝑀 = 1.03, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.92). The study protocol was approved by the institution’s ethics board. 

## 4.5 Procedure 

We first obtained consent, collected demographic information, and then briefed participants on the study tasks. Then they put on the VR headset and completed the built-in eye-tracking calibration, which was repeated whenever the headset was re-worn to ensure accuracy [56]. Each condition had three phases. In the training phase , partici-pants practiced the mode-switching + subselection technique for three one-minute trials with only 10 spheres in the grid and no specified targets. In total, 36 training trials were conducted, which were excluded from the analysis. In the experimental phase , par-ticipants performed the randomized target grouping task. They were instructed to complete the three trial repetitions of each con-dition continuously. In the questionnaire phase , participants filled out questionnaires evaluating their experience with that specific condition, and were offered short breaks before the next one. After completing all conditions, participants ranked the mode-switching and subselection techniques in order of preference and took part in a short semi-structured interview. During the interview, participants were asked to elaborate on the rationale behind their rankings and reflect on their experience. Overall, the study lasted about an hour. CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain Bashar et al. 

Figure 3: Task completion time (TCT) results for the interaction between (a) mode-switching and subselection, (b) mode-switching and number of targets, (c) subselection and mode-switching, and (d) subselection and number of targets. 

## 4.6 Evaluation Metrics 

• Task Completion Time (TCT) : The interval between tapping the “Start” button and performing the action that ended the trial. 

• Mode-Switching Time (MST) : Time from tapping the “Start” button to the first successful mode change. MST was cal-culated twice per trial: once each for entering and exiting multi-selection mode. For example, with DoublePinch , the first MST was measured from the press of the “Start” button until the system registered the second pinch, which trig-gered multi-selection mode. The second MST was measured from the moment the last sphere was selected until the next double-pinch was detected, finalizing the group and return-ing to single-selection mode. 

• Mode Error (ME) : The sum of how many times (1) participants attempted multi-selection without first switching modes [ 30 ], and (2) the system reverted to single-selection during multi-mode. 

• Accidental Subselection Ratio (ASR) : Number of distractors (white spheres in Figure 2) unintentionally grouped during a trial, divided by the total number of subselections in that trial [42]. 

• Error Rate (ER) : Defined as the sum of the number of missed targets and the number of distractors selected, divided by the total number of grouped objects [42, 84]. 

• Inverse Efficiency (IE) : We calculated the success rate as the percentage of error-free trials [ 42 , 91 ] and computed IE as TCT divided by success rate, capturing the speed–accuracy trade-off. Higher values indicate lower efficiency. 

• Number of Actions (NoA) : Total count of discrete actions per trial, including both mode-switching gestures/commands and subselections [84]. 

• Preference and Subjective Task Load : After each condition, participants completed the System Usability Scale (SUS) [ 8], NASA-RTLX [ 24 ], and Borg CR10 [ 95 ]. Post-study, partici-pants ranked the techniques and elaborated on their choices in a semi-structured interview. 

## 5 Results 

Across all conditions and participants, we recorded 27864 multi-selections (including accidental subselections). Data was analyzed using three-way repeated measures (RM) ANOVA (see Section 4.2) and Bonferroni correction for post-hoc analysis. We considered continuous variables to be normally distributed when skewness and kurtosis were within ±1 [22 , 52 ]. For non-(log)-normal variables, we used the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test. In cases where sphericity was violated, Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were applied. Trials in which participants skipped or failed to complete the task were excluded from the analysis. In addition, outlier trials with completion times greater than three standard deviations above the mean were removed (22 trials, 2.55%), as well as two accidentally skipped trials (0.25%), totaling 24 trials (2.80%) being excluded. For questionnaire data (Borg CR10, SUS, NASA-RTLX), we used the Friedman test with the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test for post-hoc analysis (Bonferroni corrected). For brevity, we only report the most relevant significant results here. Complete RM ANOVA results and analysis of the evaluation metric Hand Movement (HM) and Rotation (HR) are provided in the supplemental materials. In all graphs, error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, and statistical significance is annotated as: ∗ (𝑝 < .05 ), ∗∗ (𝑝 < .01 ), and ∗ ∗ ∗ (𝑝 < .001 ). 

## 5.1 Task Completion Time (TCT) – Figure 3 

A significant three-way interaction was found for TCT, 𝐹 (12 , 348 ) =

44 .911 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .608 . In addition, there was a significant in-teraction between mode-switching and subselection techniques, 

𝐹 (6, 174 ) = 11 .515 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .284 . Overall, participants com-pleted the task fastest with DoublePinch and slowest with SemiP-inch (Figure 3a). The interaction between mode-switching and number of targets was also significant, 𝐹 (6, 174 ) = 162 .52 , 𝑝 <

.001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .849 . Participants took more time to complete the task as the number of targets increased, with the sharpest rise for SemiP-inch (Figure 3b). gP was the fastest, followed by gV , while gD 

was slowest (Figure 3c). There was also a significant interaction between subselection and the number of targets. Post-hoc analy-sis again showed that gP was fastest (Figure 3d). Taken together, 

DoublePinch + gP achieved the lowest completion times, whereas 

SemiPinch + gD produced the highest. Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain 

## 5.2 Mode-Switching Time (MST) – Figure 4a 

The results showed that there was a significant main effect of mode-switching technique on MST, 𝐹 (1.672 , 48 .492 ) = 1339 .69 , 𝑝 <

.001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .98 . Post-hoc comparisons showed that both DoublePinch 

and Voice were significantly slower than FullPinch and SemiP-inch , with no significant difference between either of the two pairs.  

> (a) (b)

Figure 4: (a) Mode-switching time (MST) and (b) mode error (ME) results for the four mode-switching techniques. 

## 5.3 Mode Error (ME) – Figure 4b 

Only a significant main effect of the mode-switching technique was found, 𝐹 (3, 87 ) = 6.516 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .183 . SemiPinch produced the most errors, followed by FullPinch , whereas DoublePinch 

and Voice exhibited least errors. Post-hoc test confirmed that SemiP-inch and FullPinch were significantly more error-prone than both 

DoublePinch and Voice .

## 5.4 Accidental Subselection Ratio (ASR) – Figure 5 

Significant interactions were observed between mode-switching and subselection techniques, 𝐹 (4.475 , 129 .775 ) = 8.04 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

=

.217 , mode-switching and number of targets, 𝐹 (3.491 , 101 .249 ) =

5.58 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .161 , and a three-way interaction of all three factors, 𝐹 (7.336 , 212 .750 ) = 2.38 , 𝑝 = .006 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .076 . Post-hoc tests showed that SemiPinch produced significantly higher ASR than all other switching techniques (Figure 5a). For subselection, 

Voice performed better in general (Figure 5c). Participants selected fewer distractors when the number of targets increased, which was common across all mode-switching techniques (Figure 5b). The three-way interaction indicated that Quasi techniques, particularly 

SemiPinch paired with gP , increased ASR at lower target counts, whereas Persistent -modes maintained stability across subselec-tion techniques and number of targets. 

## 5.5 Error Rate (ER) – Figure 6 

Significant interactions were found between mode-switching and subselection techniques, 𝐹 (3.012 , 87 .357 ) = 5.90 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

=

.169 , and between mode-switching and number of targets, 𝐹 (2.867 ,

83 .129 ) = 4.22 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .127 . Post-hoc revealed that SemiP-inch produced the most errors (Figures 6a and 6b), while gV exhib-ited the fewest errors (Figures 6c and 6d). Like ASR, ER showed a similar pattern where the errors decreased with increasing targets. 

## 5.6 Inverse Efficiency (IE) – Figure 7 

The IE data showed a significant two-way interaction between mode-switching and subselection, 𝐹 (6, 174 ) = 10 .78 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

=

.271 , mode-switching and number of targets, 𝐹 (3.880 , 112 .506 ) =

13 .84 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .323 , and subselection and number of targets, 

𝐹 (2.872 , 83 .288 ) = 9.66 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .250 . The three-way interac-tion was also significant, 𝐹 (6.204 , 179 .918 ) = 11 .05 , 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

=

.276 . Post-hoc revealed that SemiPinch and gD (Figures 7a and 7d) resulted in the highest IE (least efficient performance). A simi-lar pattern was also observed as the number of targets increased (Figures 7b and 7c). While Voice resulted in lower IE for a smaller number of targets, gP produced lower IE overall at a higher number of targets, outperforming both gD and gV (Figure 7c). 

## 5.7 Number of Actions (NoA) – Figure 8 

Analysis of the NoA revealed a significant interaction between mode-switching and number of targets, 𝐹 (3.306 , 95 .887 ) = 4.18 , 𝑝 <

.006 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .097 . While all mode-switching techniques scaled with the target number, Voice required the fewest actions, whereas 

SemiPinch consistently required the most actions. 

## 5.8 Subjective Results – Figure 9 

For Borg CR10, we found a significant effect of mode-switching, 

𝜒 2 (3) = 66 .24 , 𝑝 < .001 . Post-hoc analysis showed that SemiPinch 

caused the highest arm fatigue. FullPinch was also rated more fatiguing than DoublePinch , while Voice was consistently per-ceived as requiring the least effort (Figure 9a). Usability ratings (SUS) also differed significantly, 𝜒 2 (3) = 80 .19 , 𝑝 < .001 . Dou-blePinch achieved the best scores, followed by Voice , FullPinch ,with SemiPinch being the least usable. NASA-RTLX results re-vealed clear differences in workload, 𝜒 2 (3) = 75 .05 , 𝑝 < .001 . Post-hoc analysis showed that SemiPinch demanded the most effort, followed by FullPinch , while DoublePinch and Voice were signif-icantly less demanding. Frustration and temporal demand followed the same pattern. Physical demand was higher for SemiPinch and 

FullPinch than for DoublePinch , while Voice was consistently rated to demand the least workload. Preferences mirrored these trends. As shown in Figures 9b and 9c, 17 participants (56.7%) ranked DoublePinch as their top choice and 12 (40%) favored Voice , while SemiPinch was least preferred by most. For subselection, 16 (53.3%) participants preferred gD , 12 (40%) chose gP as the best, and 16 (53.3%) ranked it the second-best, whereas only 2 (6.67%) ranked gV as most preferred, noticing gV ’s hands-free nature but also describing it as tiring and inconsistent. Detailed participant feedback for each technique is presented below: 

FullPinch . Participants found FullPinch familiar. Several noted it “ felt natural ” (P6, P10, P21), but four reported that sustaining the pinch gesture became “ tiring ” (P7, P18, P22, P29). P13 complained, “holding my fingers tightly made them numb ,” while P20 mentioned it was “ fine for a short time but uncomfortable when longer. ”

SemiPinch . SemiPinch was consistently criticized as “ uncertain ”(P1, P12, P16, P28), “ not reliable ” (P4, P14, P22, P24), and “ hard to keep ” (P4, P19, P23). Users reported frequent unintentional mode switches, such as P30, “ it was sometimes going back to single mode without my intention ,” and P17, “ I was watching my fingers instead of the objects .” Participants (P11, P22) also described it as the most CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain Bashar et al. 

Figure 5: Accidental subselection ratio (ASR) results for the interaction between (a) mode-switching and subselection, (b) mode-switching and number of targets, and (c) subselection and mode-switching. 

Figure 6: Error rate (ER) results for the interaction between (a) mode-switching and subselection, (b) mode-switching and number of targets, (c) subselection and mode-switching, and (d) number of targets and mode-switching. 

Figure 7: Inverse Efficiency (IE) results for the interaction between (a) mode-switching and subselection, (b) mode-switching and number of targets, (c) subselection and number of targets, and (d) number of targets and subselection. 

fatiguing gesture. While they appreciated the mode status feedback (Figure 2), they had to focus on the gesture to sustain it. P11 said, “I needed to pay extra attention to it cause it was not stable ”, with P19 summarizing it as “ the least usable .” Only P21 described it as “interesting ” and “ comfortable ”. 

DoublePinch . Most users who ranked DoublePinch first de-scribed it as “ clear ” (P3, P9, P14, P15) and “ easy ” (P8, P24, P26, P27), finding that it provided a strong sense of control. P27 emphasized that the two quick pinches were “ easy to perform without thinking ”Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain  

> (a) (b)

Figure 8: Number of actions (NoA) results for the interaction between (a) mode-switching and number of targets, and (b) subselection and mode-switching. 

Figure 9: User experience results of the multi-selection techniques. Average (a) NASA-RTLX (Mental Demand, Physical Demand, Temporal Demand, Performance, Effort, Frustration), SUS (Usability), and the perceived Borg CR10 (Exertion) scores for the four mode-switching techniques; Borg CR10 scores were linearly scaled to 0–100 for consistency. Participants’ preference rankings for the (b) four mode-switching and (c) three subselection techniques. 

and the mode status feedback (Figure 2) was helpful, which con-tributed to greater confidence in use. Two participants (P11, P25) reported DoublePinch being slow at first but became faster once they “ got the hang of it. ” Two (P2, P5) related the gesture to a mouse double-click, finding the similarity “ interesting .” 

Voice . Feedback on Voice was largely positive. Several partic-ipants valued its low physical effort, calling it “ comfortable ” (P2, P8, P24) and “ easy to use ” (P15, P26). The flexibility to choose from multiple words was appreciated, with P5 commenting, “ I could just say the word that felt natural to me. ” A couple of them (P12, P29) mentioned occasional recognition issues or felt “ awkward speak-ing aloud .” One participant (P24) remarked that it “ felt similar to interacting with my HomePod. ”

gD . Feedback on gD was mixed. Some participants appreciated its “ effortless ” nature (P1, P10, P18), with P7 saying, “ I didn’t need to move my hands at all, it was nice. ” Others, however criticized it as “ slow ” (P5, P16) and prone to unintended activations. Multiple participants (P5, P14, P20, P22, P30) reported that “ sometimes it selected when I didn’t want it to ,” while P27 described experiencing eye fatigue from prolonged fixations. 

gP . Participants generally described gP as “ fast ” (P4, P11, P17) and “ precise ” (P6, P13, P19). However, few (P15, P28) remarked on finger fatigue, particularly when many targets had to be selected while maintaining a SemiPinch with the NDH. P23 reported that while holding FullPinch on the NDH, they occasionally released it unintentionally when performing a pinch with the DH. We made similar observations during the study for other participants as well. 

gV . Opinions on gV were mixed as well. Some participants high-lighted its hands-free convenience, calling it “ relaxing ” (P3, P12) and “ less tiring ” (P27). P8, however, expressed their concerns, “ It was nice not having to move my hands, but saying it over and over is not pleasant ,” while P26 noted that “ it worked best when I just said the same word each time. ” Others (P15, P22, P29) criticized it as “slow ” or “ awkward ,” with P19 adding that “ sometimes it didn’t catch my command correctly. ” P25 remarked “ Selecting all orange objects would have been better to say than selecting them one by one. ”CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain Bashar et al. 

## 6 Discussion 

In this work, we examined the combined effects of mode-switching and subselection techniques on multi-selection performance within gaze-based, controller-free XR UIs. We compared two Quasi mode-switching techniques ( FullPinch , SemiPinch ) with two Persis-tent alternatives ( DoublePinch , Voice ), together with three subs-election techniques, Gaze+Dwell ( gD ), Gaze+Pinch ( gP ), and Gaze+ Voice ( gV ), to multi-select 6, 8, or 10 targets (Figure 1). Our findings reveal a trade-off between these strategies, particularly in terms of mode stability, error cost, and cognitive demand. 

## 6.1 RQ1: Quasi vs. Persistent Mode-Switching 

Persistent -modes consistently outperformed Quasi -modes across TCT, ME, ER, NoA, workload, usability, and user preference. Al-though Quasi -modes offer faster mode-switching (Figure 4a), their interaction costs were much higher. A key weakness of Quasi -modes was their instability. Small fluctuations in muscle tension, natural tremor, or brief reductions in hand-tracking confidence fre-quently caused unperceived mode exits. Particularly for SemiPinch ,even momentary unintentional relaxation resulted in reverting the mode to single-selection. The next subselection thereby cleared the entire previously selected group, thus requiring regrouping of the whole set of targets, i.e., an error with a global performance cost. Thus, SemiPinch showed higher error rates, steeper increases in TCT, higher cognitive load and fatigue (Figure 9a), and the lowest subjective preference ratings (Figure 9b) .In contrast, FullPinch was comparatively more stable as main-taining the gesture was more natural and easy due to the inherent support and tactile feedback of the two fingers [ 37 ]. However, it was still perceived as fatiguing due to the need to sustain the pos-ture. Also, we intentionally did not design FullPinch to revert to single-selection mode upon tracking loss and instead ended the trial. We did this as reverting modes would have conflicted with our design of ending the trial on pinch release, thereby making the interaction unnatural. While our design choices for SemiPinch 

elevated errors, we argue that choosing to end the trial early due to gesture misrecognition issues would have had similar outcomes. Although ME and NoA would have reduced, ER would have sky-rocketed due to an increase in missed targets and a decrease in total grouped objects. Overall, both Quasi techniques suffered from substantial cognitive and physical effort as users needed to continu-ously monitor their finger posture while simultaneously trying to gaze at targets, disrupting flow, and increasing attentional demands. Simply, the Quasi gestures were a constant distraction. 

Persistent -modes, by contrast, were more immune to track-ing issues as there was no need to sustain the gesture/command. Further, forgetting to change the mode at the beginning of a trial, a common drawback of Persistent -mode [ 83 ], was less costly than unintentional gesture-tracking loss, as the error was imme-diately visible and local: selecting the second object in the wrong (i.e., single-selection) mode reverted the selection of only the previ-ously selected item, visually reminding users of their mistake. These reasons potentially explain why Persistent -mode techniques, 

DoublePinch and Voice , offered a more robust and efficient performance , with lower TCT and error rates, even as the num-ber of targets increased, and why they were rated by participants as more usable, reliable, and less tiring. Moreover, these findings also align with Norman’s principles [ 61 ]: Persistent toggles make state legible, actions reversible, and feedback immediate, thereby narrowing the “gulfs of execution and evaluation” .

## 6.2 RQ2: Scaling Behavior of Pinch-Based Mode-Switching 

Prior work [ 42 ] used DH semi-pinch mode-switching with NDH pinch subselection for small target sets (2–6 items). In contrast, we assigned SemiPinch to the NDH (based on prior findings that NDH gestures tend to perform better [ 88 , 89 , 92 ]) and gP subselection to the DH [ 21 ]. Further, as per our design of SemiPinch , and as discussed above, the momentary gesture-tracking losses produced a snowball effect as target counts increased — every unintended exit forced regrouping from scratch, raising frustration and fatigue, and thus, making further slips more likely. Although it is unclear how Kim et al. [ 42 ] dealt with gesture-tracking loss, we believe that these design differences of DH vs. NDH gesture assignment, different target set sizes, and accommodating a more realistic cost of mode slips in our study potentially explain why SemiPinch + gP 

yielded higher errors in our work (7.1%; Figure 6c) compared to the 

≈2% reported previously [42]. Moreover, our participants completed the 6-target condition task faster (7333 ms TCT for SemiPinch + gP ) compared to ≈9000 ms in previous work [ 42 ]. One possible explanation is that continu-ously selecting a larger number of targets (6, 8, or 10) leads to faster selection of each individual object on average compared to selecting fewer targets (e.g., 2 items), as more repetitive actions enable participants to adopt a more efficient rhythm. Yet, and in line with speed-accuracy trade-offs [ 5], this faster interaction may have further contributed to the higher errors observed in our study. Overall, our results suggest a potentially interesting phenom-enon that extends prior work [ 42 ]: SemiPinch is viable for short, hand-focused interactions with a small set of targets, but is vulnerable when sustained over longer sequences or under noisy hand-tracking conditions . Yet, further work is required to verify this. As for FullPinch , it was more stable than SemiPinch but con-tinued to decline with an increase in the number of targets. In contrast, DoublePinch achieved superior performance and scaled more efficiently (Figure 7). 

## 6.3 RQ3: Interplay Between Mode-Switching and Subselection 

Mode-switching stability directly influenced subselection perfor-mance. When Quasi -modes slipped, users had to split attention between maintaining the gesture and confirming targets, disrupting the natural flow of gaze-based selection. In contrast, Persistent -modes provided more efficient performance (Figure 7) as mode maintenance required no attention, and thus, subselection tech-niques operated more independently. Across subselection techniques, users were fastest with gP , but it incurred more errors, potentially due to late-triggers [ 43 , 68 ] when used in quick successions. gD was noted as more “ effortless ” but “slow ” and error-prone [ 36 ]. gV reduced physical effort but added speech recognition latency, monotony, and occasional recognition errors. Participants disliked repeating short voice commands for Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain 

each object, and performance was slower than gP (Figure 3). Instead, 

gV was perceived to be better suited for high-level commands rather than granular, item-by-item confirmations. Combinations further clarified these trade-offs. DoublePinch 

+ gP produced the fastest, most accurate, and preferred in-teraction , further supporting bimanual interaction and reinforc-ing the dominance of gaze+pinch interaction in recent XR de-vices [ 32 , 73 , 100 ]. Voice + gV was reliable but slow. Pairing gV with 

Quasi -mode techniques slightly reduced subselection errors (Fig-ure 6a), but the inherent instability of Quasi -modes still required frequent regrouping. Although our study used a controlled layout, the patterns we observed — Quasi -mode instability, DoublePinch + gP outper-forming other alternatives, and voice recognition latency — come from intrinsic properties of the input techniques, not the spatial arrangement. We validated this in a separate pilot study with 12 participants using varied target sizes ( 1.72 ◦, 2.86 ◦) and a better 3D representation of the 2D target grid (while keeping the rest of the experimental setup identical to the main study). There, we found performance patterns to be consistent with our main user study (see supplementary materials). We therefore expect these underlying trade-offs to potentially hold for similar 3D environments, though factors such as depth and occlusion need further investigation. 

## 7 Design Recommendations 

Favor Persistent over Quasi strategies for serial multi-selection of moderate target sets. Persistent -mode toggles (DoublePinch , Voice ) sustained lower error rates (Figure 6) and better efficiency (Figure 7) for moderate target sets (6–10 targets). We expect these benefits to also extend to even larger sets as well, as 

Persistent strategies keep the state active until explicitly changed and avoid unintentional silent mode drops. Still, to improve mode awareness, it is critical that clear visual, auditory, or haptic cues make the active mode perceivable at all times. 

Use Gaze+Pinch ( gP ) for granular, sequential selections. 

The combination of gaze for targeting and pinch for confirmation delivered the best speed–accuracy trade-off [ 59 ]. Pinch gestures remain natural and familiar for users. 

Limit reliance on dwell and repeated voice subselections. 

While dwell reduces physical effort, it suffers from the Midas Touch problem [ 36 ]. For voice, repeated commands were rated monoto-nous and socially awkward. Both techniques should be used with caution for sequential object selection and are more appropriate in scenarios involving fewer targets or where hands-free interaction is required, e.g., for people with limited muscle control [55]. 

Leverage voice for parallel or high-level actions. Voice input is well-suited for “one-to-many” commands, such as confirming an entire highlighted group at once or for switching modes. Several participants noted that voice would be more compelling if it could act on multiple items with one/two utterances (e.g., “select all,” “add these,” or “start” → swipe with gaze → “end” [ 25 ]). Thus, we recommend designers avoid requiring a spoken command for each object and instead use voice to compress multiple actions into one/two steps. 

Consider target set size when selecting multi-selection techniques. Although prior work [ 42 ] found semi-pinch a viable option for small target sets (2-6), our results showed that both 

Quasi techniques, FullPinch and SemiPinch , degraded sharply as the number of targets increased from 6 to 10. In contrast, Persis-tent -modes scaled more efficiently, and thus are better suited for scenarios involving larger groups of objects. 

## 8 Limitations and Future Work 

Here, we focused on serial multi-selection with up to ten targets in a controlled grid layout. Although this reflects common XR contexts such as file or photo management, real-world scenarios may involve denser, irregular, or 3D spatial distributions of objects. Thus, our findings should be interpreted as a controlled baseline rather than a complete account of all 3D contexts. Future work should extend our evaluation to more naturalistic 3D layouts, including varying depth planes and spatial occlusions, to assess how the trade-offs observed in our work transfer to more complex environments. Sim-ilarly, we recommend future studies to investigate parallel selection techniques (e.g., volume [ 98 ]) that may have benefits, particularly for densely arranged items. Moreover, our focus in this work was to isolate and evaluate the core multi-selection mechanism. Thus, we intentionally scoped out deselection to avoid introducing additional confounds. Although de-selection is an important component of multi-selection workflows, understanding its interaction with serial and parallel multi-selection requires further investigation. Future work should therefore exam-ine how different deselection strategies influence multi-selection performance in XR. Finally, our experimental task involved targets and distractors differentiated by color to ensure experimental control. While this facilitated systematic comparisons, we acknowledge that this design choice diverges from real-world XR applications where targets are not pre-highlighted, and users must visually search for and classify objects based on attributes such as name, size, content of an image, or spatial location. 

## 9 Conclusion 

Here, we examined multi-selection in XR and how different mode-switching and subselection strategies influence user performance and experience. By comparing two Quasi techniques ( FullPinch ,

SemiPinch ) with two Persistent techniques ( DoublePinch , Voice ), and pairing them with three subselection methods (Gaze+Pinch, Gaze+Dwell, Gaze+Voice), to multi-select 6-10 targets, we provided 

the first comprehensive evaluation of this design space. Our results show that Persistent strategies, particularly Dou-blePinch combined with Gaze+Pinch subselection, yielded the most efficient performance, while Quasi strategies suffered from instability, fatigue, and high error rates. Hands-free Voice -based switching was well received and reduced effort, yet repeated voice commands for subselection were less preferred compared to hand-gesture confirmation. These findings highlight that mode-switching stability is critical for multi-selection. More broadly, the results em-phasize the interplay between mode-switching and subselection — when mode-switching is unstable, subselection suffers, amplifying errors and workload. Based on these findings, we provided design recommendations that could potentially influence multi-selection in XR and beyond. CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain Bashar et al. 

## References 

[1] Leopoly [n. d.]. Shapelab — Official Website . Leopoly. https://shapelabvr.com/ [2] A Terry Bahill, Michael R Clark, and Lawrence Stark. 1975. The main sequence, a tool for studying human eye movements. Mathematical biosciences 24, 3-4 (1975), 191–204. [3] Mohammad Raihanul Bashar, Mohammadreza Amini, Wolfgang Stuerzlinger, Mine Sarac, Ken Pfeuffer, Mayra Donaji Barrera Machuca, and Anil Ufuk Batmaz. 2025. Depth3DSketch: Freehand Sketching Out of Arm’s Reach in Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–8. [4] Mohammad Raihanul Bashar, Mayra Donaji Barrera Machuca, Wolfgang Stuer-zlinger, and Anil Ufuk Batmaz. 2025. The effect of visual depth on the vergence– accommodation conflict on 3D selection performance within virtual reality headsets: MR Bashar et al. The Visual Computer (2025), 1–17. [5] Anil Ufuk Batmaz and Wolfgang Stuerzlinger. 2022. Effective Throughput Analysis of Different Task Execution Strategies for Mid-Air Fitts’ Tasks in Virtual Reality. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 28, 11 (2022), 3939–3947. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2022.3203105 [6] Joanna Bergström, Tor-Salve Dalsgaard, Jason Alexander, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2021. How to evaluate object selection and manipulation in vr? guidelines from 20 years of studies. In proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–20. [7] Andrew Bragdon and Hsu-Sheng Ko. 2011. Gesture select: acquiring remote tar-gets on large displays without pointing. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 187–196. [8] John Brooke. 2013. SUS: a retrospective. Journal of usability studies 8, 2 (2013). [9] Géry Casiez, Nicolas Roussel, and Daniel Vogel. 2012. 1 € filter: a simple speed-based low-pass filter for noisy input in interactive systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2527–2530. [10] Nikolas Chaconas and Tobias Höllerer. 2018. An evaluation of bimanual gestures on the microsoft hololens. In 2018 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user interfaces (VR) . IEEE, 1–8. [11] Ishan Chatterjee, Robert Xiao, and Chris Harrison. 2015. Gaze+ gesture: Ex-pressive, precise and targeted free-space interactions. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on international conference on multimodal interaction . 131–138. [12] Di Laura Chen, Ravin Balakrishnan, and Tovi Grossman. 2020. Disambiguation techniques for freehand object manipulations in virtual reality. In 2020 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user interfaces (VR) . IEEE, 285–292. [13] Mungyeong Choe, Yeongcheol Choi, Jaehyun Park, and Hyun K. Kim. 2019. Comparison of Gaze Cursor Input Methods for Virtual Reality Devices. In-ternational Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 35, 7 (2019), 620–629. arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2018.1484054 doi:10.1080/10447318.2018. 1484054 [14] Hoda Dehmeshki and Wolfgang Stuerzlinger. 2010. Design and evaluation of a perceptual-based object group selection technique. In Proceedings of HCI 2010 .BCS Learning & Development. [15] Piercarlo Dondi and Marco Porta. 2023. Gaze-based human–computer interac-tion for museums and exhibitions: technologies, applications and future per-spectives. Electronics 12, 14 (2023), 3064. [16] Augusto Esteves, Yonghwan Shin, and Ian Oakley. 2020. Comparing selection mechanisms for gaze input techniques in head-mounted displays. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 139 (2020), 102414. [17] Jacqui Fashimpaur, Amy Karlson, Tanya R Jonker, Hrvoje Benko, and Aakar Gupta. 2023. Investigating wrist deflection scrolling techniques for extended reality. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–16. [18] Unai J Fernández, Sonia Elizondo, Naroa Iriarte, Rafael Morales, Amalia Ortiz, Sebastian Marichal, Oscar Ardaiz, and Asier Marzo. 2022. A multi-object grasp technique for placement of objects in virtual reality. Applied Sciences 12, 9 (2022), 4193. [19] Eric Godden, William Steedman, and Matthew KXJ Pan. 2025. Robotic Charac-terization of Markerless Hand-Tracking on Meta Quest Pro and Quest 3 Virtual Reality Headsets. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 

(2025). [20] Google. [n. d.]. Using the Tilt Brush Tools, Quick Tools, and Menu panels . Tilt Brush Help. https://support.google.com/tiltbrush/answer/6389713?hl=en [21] Yves Guiard. 1987. Asymmetric division of labor in human skilled bimanual action: The kinematic chain as a model. Journal of motor behavior 19, 4 (1987), 486–517. [22] Joseph F Hair Jr, William C Black, Barry J Babin, and Rolph E. Anderson. 2014. Multivariate data analysis. [23] John Paulin Hansen, Vijay Rajanna, I Scott MacKenzie, and Per Bækgaard. 2018. A Fitts’ law study of click and dwell interaction by gaze, head and mouse with a head-mounted display. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Communication by Gaze Interaction . 1–5. [24] Sandra G Hart. 2006. NASA-task load index (NASA-TLX); 20 years later. In 

Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting , Vol. 50. Sage publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 904–908. [25] Ramin Hedeshy, Chandan Kumar, Raphael Menges, and Steffen Staab. 2021. Hummer: Text Entry by Gaze and Hum. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Con-ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 741, 11 pages. doi:10.1145/3411764.3445501 [26] Ken Hinckley, Francois Guimbretiere, Patrick Baudisch, Raman Sarin, Maneesh Agrawala, and Ed Cutrell. 2006. The springboard: multiple modes in one spring-loaded control. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems . 181–190. [27] Uta Hinrichs and Sheelagh Carpendale. 2011. Gestures in the wild: studying multi-touch gesture sequences on interactive tabletop exhibits. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3023–3032. [28] Teresa Hirzle, Fabian Fischbach, Julian Karlbauer, Pascal Jansen, Jan Gugen-heimer, Enrico Rukzio, and Andreas Bulling. 2022. Understanding, addressing, and analysing digital eye strain in virtual reality head-mounted displays. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 29, 4 (2022), 1–80. [29] Baosheng James Hou, Joshua Newn, Ludwig Sidenmark, Anam Ahmad Khan, Per Bækgaard, and Hans Gellersen. 2023. Classifying head movements to separate head-gaze and head gestures as distinct modes of input. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14. [30] Yanfei Hu Fleischhauer, Hemant Bhaskar Surale, Florian Alt, and Ken Pfeuffer. 2023. Gaze-based mode-switching to enhance interaction with menus on tablets. In Proceedings of the 2023 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications .1–8. [31] Aulikki Hyrskykari, Howell Istance, and Stephen Vickers. 2012. Gaze gestures or dwell-based interaction?. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications . 229–232. [32] Apple Inc. 2025. Learn basic gestures and controls on Apple Vision Pro. https: //support.apple.com/en-ca/guide/apple-vision-pro/tan1e2a29e00/visionos. [33] Apple Inc. 2025. Select items on your Mac screen. https://support.apple.com/en-ca/guide/mac-help/mchlp1378/mac. Mac User Guide — macOS Sequoia 15. [34] Toshiya Isomoto, Shota Yamanaka, and Buntarou Shizuki. 2022. Interaction design of dwell selection toward gaze-based ar/vr interaction. In 2022 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications . 1–2. [35] Robert JK Jacob. 1990. What you look at is what you get: eye movement-based interaction techniques. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 11–18. [36] Robert JK Jacob. 1995. Eye tracking in advanced interface design. Virtual environments and advanced interface design 258, 288 (1995), 2. [37] Jose James. 2022. Multi-Finger Haptics: Analysis of Human Hand Grasp towards a Tripod Three-Finger Haptic Grasp model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00049 

(2022). [38] Sujin Jang, Wolfgang Stuerzlinger, Satyajit Ambike, and Karthik Ramani. 2017. Modeling cumulative arm fatigue in mid-air interaction based on perceived exertion and kinetics of arm motion. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 3328–3339. [39] Hamraz Javaheri, Omid Ghamarnejad, Paul Lukowicz, Gregor Alexander Stavrou, and Jakob Karolus. 2025. LLMs Enable Context-Aware Augmented Re-ality in Surgical Navigation. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 3205–3220. [40] A.R. Jayasri, Dr.P. Kanimozhi, and Dr. T. Ananth Kumar. 2023. A Brief Review on Voice Assisted Hands-free Virtual Painting System. Middle East Journal of Applied Science & Technology (2023). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: 265347068 [41] Anam Ahmad Khan, Joshua Newn, Ryan M Kelly, Namrata Srivastava, James Bailey, and Eduardo Velloso. 2021. GAVIN: Gaze-assisted voice-based implicit note-taking. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 28, 4 (2021), 1–32. [42] Jinwook Kim, Sangmin Park, Qiushi Zhou, Mar Gonzalez-Franco, Jeongmi Lee, and Ken Pfeuffer. 2025. PinchCatcher: Enabling Multi-selection for Gaze+Pinch. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 853, 16 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713530 [43] Manu Kumar, Jeff Klingner, Rohan Puranik, Terry Winograd, and Andreas Paepcke. 2008. Improving the accuracy of gaze input for interaction. In Proceed-ings of the 2008 symposium on Eye tracking research & applications . 65–68. [44] Matěj Lang, Clemens Strobel, Felix Weckesser, Danielle Langlois, Enkelejda Kasneci, Barbora Kozlíková, and Michael Krone. 2023. A multimodal smartwatch-based interaction concept for immersive environments. Computers & Graphics 

117 (2023), 85–95. [45] Joseph J LaViola Jr, Ernst Kruijff, Ryan P McMahan, Doug Bowman, and Ivan P Poupyrev. 2017. 3D user interfaces: theory and practice . Addison-Wesley Profes-sional. [46] Daniel J Liebling and Susan T Dumais. 2014. Gaze and mouse coordination in everyday work. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM international joint conference on pervasive and ubiquitous computing: adjunct publication . 1141–1150. Eyes on Many: Evaluating Gaze, Hand, and Voice for Multi-Object Selection in Extended Reality CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain 

[47] X. Lu, D. Yu, H. N. Liang, W. Xu, Y. Chen, X. Li, and K. Hasan. 2020. Exploration of Hands-free Text Entry Techniques For Virtual Reality. In 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) . IEEE, 344–349. doi:10. 1109/ISMAR50242.2020.00061 [48] John Finley Lucas. 2005. Design and evaluation of 3D multiple object selection techniques . Ph. D. Dissertation. Virginia Tech. [49] Mathias N Lystbæk, Thorbjørn Mikkelsen, Roland Krisztandl, Eric J Gonzalez, Mar Gonzalez-Franco, Hans Gellersen, and Ken Pfeuffer. 2024. Hands-on, Hands-off: Gaze-Assisted Bimanual 3D Interaction. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1–12. [50] Päivi Majaranta, Ulla-Kaija Ahola, and Oleg Špakov. 2009. Fast gaze typing with an adjustable dwell time. In Proceedings of the sigchi conference on human factors in computing systems . 357–360. [51] Päivi Majaranta and Andreas Bulling. 2014. Eye Tracking and Eye-Based Human– Computer Interaction . Springer London, London, 39–65. doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-6392-3_3 [52] Paul Mallery and Darren George. 2003. SPSS for Windows step by step: a simple guide and reference. Allyn, Bacon, Boston, (2003). [53] Brittany Mennuti. 2018. Take your Blocks models to the next level . Google. https: //blog.google/products/google-ar-vr/take-your-blocks-models-next-level/ [54] Pedro Monteiro, Bruno Peixoto, Guilherme Gonçalves, Hugo Coelho, Luís Bar-bosa, Miguel Melo, and Maximino Bessa. 2025. Beyond the Hands: Evaluating the Usability of Hands-Free Methods and Controllers for Menu Selection Dur-ing an Immersive VR Experience. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction (2025), 1–38. [55] Martez E Mott, Shane Williams, Jacob O Wobbrock, and Meredith Ringel Morris. 2017. Improving dwell-based gaze typing with dynamic, cascading dwell times. In Proceedings of the 2017 chi conference on human factors in computing systems .2558–2570. [56] Aunnoy Mutasim, Anil Ufuk Batmaz, Moaaz Hudhud Mughrabi, and Wolf-gang Stuerzlinger. 2022. Performance Analysis of Saccades for Primary and Confirmatory Target Selection. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (Tsukuba, Japan) (VRST ’22) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 18, 12 pages. doi:10.1145/3562939.3565619 [57] Aunnoy K Mutasim, Mohammad Raihanul Bashar, Christof Lutteroth, Anil Ufuk Batmaz, and Wolfgang Stuerzlinger. 2025. There Is More to Dwell Than Meets the Eye: Toward Better Gaze-Based Text Entry Systems With Multi-Threshold Dwell. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–18. [58] Aunnoy K Mutasim, Anil Ufuk Batmaz, Moaaz Hudhud Mughrabi, and Wolfgang Stuerzlinger. 2025. The Influence of Eye Gaze Interaction Technique Expertise and the Guided Evaluation Method on Text Entry Performance Evaluations. 

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 9, 3, Article ETRA17 (May 2025), 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3725842 [59] Aunnoy K Mutasim, Anil Ufuk Batmaz, and Wolfgang Stuerzlinger. 2021. Pinch, click, or dwell: Comparing different selection techniques for eye-gaze-based pointing in virtual reality. In Acm symposium on eye tracking research and applications . 1–7. [60] Naoto Nishida, Kaori Ikematsu, Junichi Sato, Shota Yamanaka, and Kota Tsub-ouchi. 2023. Single-tap latency reduction with single-or double-tap prediction. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 7, MHCI (2023), 1–26. [61] Donald A Norman. 1983. Design rules based on analyses of human error. 

Commun. ACM 26, 4 (1983), 254–258. [62] Joi Oh, Fumihiro Kato, Iwasaki Yukiko, and Hiroyasu Iwata. 2021. A 3D head pointer: a manipulation method that enables the spatial position and posture for supernumerary robotic limbs. ACTA IMEKO (2021). https://api.semanticscholar. org/CorpusID:240085378 [63] Anthony Owen and Paul Orsten. 2025. Improving Speech Recognition Accuracy in Noisy Environments Using Vosk and Custom Acoustic Models. (2025). [64] Yun Suen Pai, Tilman Dingler, and Kai Kunze. 2019. Assessing hands-free interactions for VR using eye gaze and electromyography. Virtual Reality 23, 2 (2019), 119–131. [65] Stephen Palmisano, Robert S Allison, and Juno Kim. 2020. Cybersickness in head-mounted displays is caused by differences in the user’s virtual and physical head pose. Frontiers in Virtual Reality 1 (2020), 587698. [66] Mohsen Parisay, Charalambos Poullis, and Marta Kersten-Oertel. 2021. Eye-TAP: Introducing a multimodal gaze-based technique using voice inputs with a comparative analysis of selection techniques. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 154 (2021), 102676. [67] Wookhyun Park, Woong Choi, Hanjin Jo, Geonhui Lee, and Jaehyo Kim. 2020. Analysis of control characteristics between dominant and non-dominant hands by transient responses of circular tracking movements in 3D virtual reality space. Sensors 20, 12 (2020), 3477. [68] Yeji Park, Jiwan Kim, and Ian Oakley. 2025. GazeHandSync: Mitigating Late-Trigger Errors for Seamless Gaze-Hand Interactions. In Proceedings of the 2025 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications (ETRA ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 12, 8 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3715669.3723126 [69] Pawan Patidar, Himanshu Raghuvanshi, and Sayan Sarcar. 2014. Quick-pie: An Interface for Fast and Accurate Eye Gazed based Text Entry. arXiv:1407.7313 [cs.HC] [70] Abdul Moiz Penkar, Christof Lutteroth, and Gerald Weber. 2012. Designing for the eye: design parameters for dwell in gaze interaction. In Proceedings of the 24th australian computer-human interaction conference . 479–488. [71] Ken Pfeuffer, Jason Alexander, Ming Ki Chong, and Hans Gellersen. 2014. Gaze-touch: combining gaze with multi-touch for interaction on the same surface. In 

Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . 509–518. [72] Ken Pfeuffer, Jason Alexander, Ming Ki Chong, Yanxia Zhang, and Hans-Werner Gellersen. 2015. Gaze-Shifting: Direct-Indirect Input with Pen and Touch Mod-ulated by Gaze. Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Inter-face Software & Technology (2015). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: 15305806 [73] Ken Pfeuffer, Hans Gellersen, and Mar Gonzalez-Franco. 2024. Design principles and challenges for gaze+ pinch interaction in xr. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 44, 03 (2024), 74–81. [74] Ken Pfeuffer, Benedikt Mayer, Diako Mardanbegi, and Hans Gellersen. 2017. Gaze + pinch interaction in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Spatial User Interaction (Brighton, United Kingdom) (SUI ’17) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 99–108. doi:10.1145/3131277. 3132180 [75] Ken Pfeuffer, Lukas Mecke, Sarah Delgado Rodriguez, Mariam Hassib, Hannah Maier, and Florian Alt. 2020. Empirical evaluation of gaze-enhanced menus in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology . 1–11. [76] Ken Pfeuffer, Jan Obernolte, Felix Dietz, Ville Mäkelä, Ludwig Sidenmark, Pavel Manakhov, Minna Pakanen, and Florian Alt. 2023. Palmgazer: Unimanual eye-hand menus in augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium on Spatial User Interaction . 1–12. [77] Thammathip Piumsomboon, Gun Lee, Robert W Lindeman, and Mark Billinghurst. 2017. Exploring natural eye-gaze-based interaction for immersive virtual reality. In 2017 IEEE symposium on 3D user interfaces (3DUI) . IEEE, 36–39. [78] Vijay Rajanna and John Paulin Hansen. 2018. Gaze Typing in Virtual Reality: Impact of Keyboard Design, Selection Method, and Motion. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications (Warsaw, Poland) (ETRA ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 15, 10 pages. doi:10.1145/3204493.3204541 [79] Anirudh Ramanathan. 2016. Multi-Selection in Touch-Screen Graphical User Interfaces . Ph. D. Dissertation. [80] Erica Rocchi, Anna Ferrarotti, and Marco Carli. 2025. A comparison of the Meta Quest Pro and HTC Vive Focus 3 eye-tracking systems: analysis of data accuracy and spatial precision. IEEE Access (2025). [81] Anuschka Schmitt, Naim Zierau, Andreas Janson, and Jan Marco Leimeister. 2021. Voice as a contemporary frontier of interaction design. In European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS).-Virtual .[82] Dominik Schön, Thomas Kosch, Florian Müller, Martin Schmitz, Sebastian Gün-ther, Lukas Bommhardt, and Max Mühlhäuser. 2023. Tailor twist: Assessing rotational mid-air interactions for augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14. [83] Abigail J Sellen, Gordon P Kurtenbach, and William AS Buxton. 1992. The pre-vention of mode errors through sensory feedback. Human-computer interaction 

7, 2 (1992), 141–164. [84] Rongkai Shi, Yushi Wei, Xuning Hu, Yu Liu, Yong Yue, Lingyun Yu, and Hai-Ning Liang. 2024. Experimental analysis of freehand multi-object selection techniques in virtual reality head-mounted displays. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 8, ISS (2024), 93–111. [85] Rongkai Shi, Nan Zhu, Hai-Ning Liang, and Shengdong Zhao. 2021. Explor-ing head-based mode-switching in virtual reality. In 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) . IEEE, 118–127. [86] Ludwig Sidenmark, Christopher Clarke, Joshua Newn, Mathias N Lystbæk, Ken Pfeuffer, and Hans Gellersen. 2023. Vergence matching: Inferring attention to objects in 3d environments for gaze-assisted selection. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–15. [87] Ludwig Sidenmark and Hans Gellersen. 2019. Eye&Head: Synergetic Eye and Head Movement for Gaze Pointing and Selection. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (New Orleans, LA, USA) (UIST ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1161–1174. doi:10.1145/3332165.3347921 [88] Jesse Smith, Isaac Wang, Winston Wei, Julia Woodward, and Jaime Ruiz. 2020. Evaluating the Scalability of Non-Preferred Hand Mode Switching in Augmented Reality. Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (2020). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:222110409 [89] Jesse Smith, Isaac Wang, Julia Woodward, and Jaime Ruiz. 2019. Experimen-tal Analysis of Single Mode Switching Techniques in Augmented Reality.. In CHI ’26, April 13–April 17, 2025, Barcelona, Spain Bashar et al. 

Graphics Interface . 20–1. [90] Alexis D Souchet, Domitile Lourdeaux, Alain Pagani, and Lisa Rebenitsch. 2023. A narrative review of immersive virtual reality’s ergonomics and risks at the workplace: cybersickness, visual fatigue, muscular fatigue, acute stress, and mental overload. Virtual Reality 27, 1 (2023), 19–50. [91] Yauhen Statsenko, Tetiana Habuza, Klaus Neidl-Van Gorkom, Nazar Zaki, and Taleb M Almansoori. 2020. Applying the inverse efficiency score to visual– motor task for studying speed-accuracy performance while aging. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 12 (2020), 574401. [92] Hemant Bhaskar Surale, Fabrice Matulic, and Daniel Vogel. 2019. Experimental analysis of barehand mid-air mode-switching techniques in virtual reality. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems .1–14. [93] Antón Valladares-Poncela, Paula Fraga-Lamas, and Tiago M Fernández-Caramés. 2025. On-Device Automatic Speech Recognition for Low-Resource Languages in Mixed Reality Industrial Metaverse Applications: Practical Guidelines and Evaluation of a Shipbuilding Application in Galician. IEEE Access (2025). [94] Junfeng Wang, Zhiyu Xu, Weimin Zhai, and Fei Xu. 2025. Exploring Confirma-tion Strategies for Voice Interaction in Multi-Tasking Scenario. International Journal of Social Robotics (2025), 1–14. [95] Johann Wentzel, Greg d’Eon, and Daniel Vogel. 2020. Improving virtual re-ality ergonomics through reach-bounded non-linear input amplification. In 

Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–12. [96] Daniel Wigdor. 2010. Architecting next-generation user interfaces. In Proceed-ings of the International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (Roma, Italy) 

(AVI ’10) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 16–22. doi:10.1145/1842993.1842997 [97] Graham J Wills. 1996. Selection: 524,288 ways to say" this is interesting". In 

Proceedings IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization’96 . IEEE, 54–60. [98] Zhiqing Wu, Difeng Yu, and Jorge Goncalves. 2023. Point-and volume-based multi-object acquisition in vr. In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction .Springer, 20–42. [99] Jing Xie. 2024. Intelligent Voice Assistant Interaction Design in Virtual Reality Environments. In 2024 IEEE 6th International Conference on Civil Aviation Safety and Information Technology (ICCASIT) . IEEE, 60–64. [100] Galaxy XR. 2025. Galaxy XR Interaction. https://www.samsung.com/us/xr/ galaxy-xr/galaxy-xr/. [101] Hui-Shyong Yeo, Juyoung Lee, Hyung-il Kim, Aakar Gupta, Andrea Bianchi, Daniel Vogel, Hideki Koike, Woontack Woo, and Aaron Quigley. 2019. Wrist: Watch-ring interaction and sensing technique for wrist gestures and macro-micro pointing. In Proceedings of the 21st international conference on human-computer interaction with mobile devices and services . 1–15. [102] Xin Yi, Yiqin Lu, Ziyin Cai, Zihan Wu, Yuntao Wang, and Yuanchun Shi. 2022. Gazedock: Gaze-only menu selection in virtual reality using auto-triggering peripheral menu. In 2022 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) . IEEE, 832–842. [103] Shumin Zhai, Carlos Morimoto, and Steven Ihde. 1999. Manual and gaze input cascaded (MAGIC) pointing. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 246–253. [104] Qimeng Zhang, Chang-Hun Kim, and Hae Won Byun. 2023. Multi-finger-based arbitrary region-of-interest selection in virtual reality. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 39, 20 (2023), 3969–3983. [105] Jingbo Zhao and Robert S. Allison. 2017. Real-time head gesture recognition on head-mounted displays using cascaded hidden Markov models. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) (2017), 2361– 2366. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:24959302 [106] Maozheng Zhao, Henry Huang, Zhi Li, Rui Liu, Wenzhe Cui, Kajal Toshniwal, Ananya Goel, Andrew Wang, Xia Zhao, Sina Rashidian, et al . 2022. Eyesaycor-rect: Eye gaze and voice based hands-free text correction for mobile devices. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces .470–482.