Title: EEG Foundation Model Improves Online Directional Motor Imagery Brain-computer Interface Control

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
EEG Foundation Model Improves Online Directional Motor Imagery Brain -computer 

Interface Control 

Maxim A. Karrenbach 1, Hanwen Wang 2, Zachary Johnson 2, Yidan Ding 2, and Bin He 1,2,3*  

> 1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 

USA.  

> 2

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.  

> 3

Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 

*Address correspondence to: bhe1@andrew.cmu.edu 

Abstract 

Brain -Computer interfaces (BCIs) offer a link between neural signals and external computation, 

enabling control of devices for the purposes of restoring function to motor -affected individuals and 

enhancing capabilities of a wider set of populations. Electr oencephalography (EEG) offers a high 

temporal resolution for dynamic and potential real -time feedback for non -invasive systems. 

However, its practical efficacy remains limited due to low spatial resolution and poor signal -to -

noise ratio, leading to insuffi cient decoding accuracy and unintuitive control paradigms that hinder 

reliable user interaction. In this study, we present a framework for an online EEG foundation model 

by creating a custom foundation model through spectrogram reconstruction of compact temporal 

windows and online constraints during pretraining. We evaluate the performance of the model in a 

challenging control paradigm of single -arm, directional motor imagery with dynamic movements 

for guided and free movement cursor control tasks. Our foun dation model approach achieved a final 

average accuracy of 51.3% during a goal -oriented guided control task. This represents a 15.8% 

increase over a conventional deep learning framework and a 26.3% increase above chance level, 

evaluated in a cohort of 11 h uman participants. During the free movement task, the foundation 

model invoked a higher rate of completion and lower completion times. Furthermore, the custom 

EEG foundation model demonstrated superior adaptability from same -session finetuning and 

indicate d an enhanced capability to assist subject learning. These findings highlight the potential of 

EEG foundation models to support more robust and intuitive non -invasive BCI systems, providing 

a promising modelling framework for future BCI development. 

Key words: Brain -computer interface, BCI, foundation model, deep learning, EEG 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

INTRODUCTION 

Brain -computer interfaces (BCI) are capable of providing control of external devices, with the 

potential to restore or provide alternative motor capabilities or communication abilities in clinical 

populations and beyond [1], [2] . Invasive BCI systems have created frameworks which enabled 

robust robotic manipulation [3], [4] or communicative speech [5], [6] . However, accessibility of 

such highly invasive BCIs are well limited to only severely disabled individuals due to the need for 

surgical procedures and brain implants, as well as the high cost. On the other hand, non -invasive 

electroencephalography (EEG) BCI systems have been developed to provide a safe and affordable 

means. These EEG -BCI frameworks have potential to benefit numerous patients to regain 

independence and improve quality of life, and even the general population for a variety of tasks [2] .

Research studies involving noninvasive EEG -BCI have explored the capabilities of BCI to decode 

intent or understanding from neural signals for control of external devices and communication [7] .

Early BCI studies demonstrated the ability to control a virtual cursor in 2D [8] using the 

sensorimotor rhythms of motor imagery (MI). Further studies extended the exploration to more 

complex tasks, creating frameworks to control virtual [9] and model helicopters/drones [10] , as 

well as robotic arms [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16] and hands [17] . Towards clinical applications, 

EEG -BCI has also shown the ability to aid motor -impaired populations through control of assistive 

devices like wheelchairs [18], [19] or exoskeletons [20], [21] . These achievements represent the 

capabilities of EEG -based BCI systems for functional control in both healthy and clinical 

populations. 

Despite that EEG suffers from a low signal -to -noise ratio, as the neural signals are attenuated 

between the neural activation and the scalp sensor, causing signal blurring due to volume 

conduction [22] , progresses have been made to demonstrate the potential for noninvasive BCI 

control. Studies have found that some kinematic characteristics from motor execution of the upper 

limb [23], [24], [25], [26], [27] can be decoded, even continuously [28] . Similar characteristics have 

been decoded in motor imagery as well [29], [30] , showing the interest in decoding naturalistic 

movements from EEG. However, current control methods rely on configurations of spatially 

distinct limbs, which can be unintuitive to subjects and limit the degrees of freedom of the system. 

There is a need fo r algorithmic advances in neural decoding for natural movement for use in BCI. 

Data -driven approaches based on deep learning have emerged to offer an enhanced capacity to learn 

neural representations directly from minimally processed signals by capturing complex 

spatiotemporal patterns from EEG [31], [32], [33] . However, many existing deep learning 

approaches for EEG -BCI remain optimized for specific tasks and subjects, often being evaluated 

primarily in offline settings. Some studies have explored implementing deep learning in online 

settings to advance complex c ontrol [13], [17], [34] , but use personalized, task -specific models and 

require a larger number of sessions to collect enough data to achieve high performance. Thus, the 

current online approaches cannot utilize general neural representations in EEG, instead optimizing 

via task o r subject -specific characteristics which can vary due to inter -session differences in online 

settings. As a result, the ability of deep learning to support robust and intuitive control under the 

constraints of real -time BCI operation remains limited. 

More recently, foundation models have been proposed as a general framework for representation 

learning, characterized by large -scale pretraining and adaptative fine -tuning to downstream tasks. 

By leveraging diverse datasets, foundation models aim to learn broad and transferable 

representations that extend beyond task -specific optimization. These techniques have led to 

substantial advances in fields such as computer vision and natural language processing [35], [36], 

[37] . Initial explorations which adapted foundation model techniques for offline EEG decoding 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[38], [39], [40] have indicated that foundation model techniques can learn generalizable neural 

representations from EEG from large sets of data containing a variety of tasks [41], [42], [43] , and 

even when focusing on a subset of EEG tasks [44] . These findings suggest that foundation models 

may be well suited to address representational challenges inherent in EEG signals [38], [39], [40], 

[45] .

Despite these encouraging results, the integration of EEG foundation models into online BCI 

systems remains largely unexplored. Real -time BCI operation imposes stringent constraints on 

latency, which limit the applicability of implementing existing foundation model architectures. 

Primarily, the detection of the subject’s action will be relayed to the system with latency dictated 

by the temporal length of the window used by the model. Thus, the real -time feedback of BCI 

mandates small temporal windows for th e model, with previous studies with deep learning utilize 

windows ranging between one and four seconds [13], [14], [17], [34] . Additionally, online 

experiments often implement minimal processing or contain numerous signal changes that are not 

easily dealt with in real time. These constraints represent challenges which may restrict EEG 

foundation models from being utilized in onl ine BCI currently. 

In this study, we propose a custom EEG foundation model to address the challenges that foundation 

models face when incorporated into closed -loop BCI. This model uses a pretraining process which 

utilizes spectrogram reconstruction on small time windows to c ombat latency alongside minimal 

preprocessing. Through this exploration, we aim to assess whether an EEG foundation model can 

learn strong neural representations of EEG while remaining robust to the conditions of online 

experimentation. We evaluate this mo del against a conventional deep learning model in a 

demanding online experimental setup by using single -arm dynamic motor imagery for cursor 

control. Through this spatially and temporally complex paradigm, we explore the potential of online 

EEG foundation models to enable more intuitive and natural control in EEG -BCI through stronger 

neural representations guided by online BCI considerations. 

METHODS 

Experimental Design 

Latency from longer time windows and a mismatch between offline data curation and online 

minimal preprocessing represent some of the main challenges which preclude existing EEG 

foundation models from incorporating into online EEG -BCI frameworks. To address these issues, 

we developed a Compact Spectral -Temporal Embedding Model (C -STEM) as a foundation model 

for online experimentation. Through pretraining with spectrogram reconstruction and minimal 

preprocessing on over 1200 hours of motor imagery human EEG d ata, the C -STEM framework 

aims to be robust in online experimentation. In addition, current online BCI control schemes can 

feel unintuitive and be difficult to learn and adopt, caused by an algorithmic inability to decode 

more naturalistic movements from E EG. We assessed the viability of the C -STEM framework 

through our online foundation model experimentation by implementing a control paradigm with 

single -arm dynamic directional movements for cursor control tasks, evaluating the potential that 

advanced foun dation model techniques may hold in EEG -BCI control applications. 

Compact Spectral -Temporal Embedding Model (C -STEM) 

This study introduced an architecture ( Figure 1) which aims to discretize neural EEG data into 

embeddings from short time windows to learn underlying representations of EEG from large 

amounts of unlabeled EEG data. These embeddings are trained with spectrogram and raw signal 

reconstruction and are used in further training for task -specific downstream datasets. In pretraining, 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

this model follows a classic encoder -decoder style architecture with a quantizer codebook for the 

latent space. During downstream finetuning, the encoder and codebook are frozen, and a linear 

layer is appended for task -specific classification. 

Figure 1: Overview of the C-STEM architecture. EEG signals are input as (time x channel) signals and 

flattened such that each channel is processed independently. Signals are processed in 200 ms patches. The 

transformed encoder and decoder act to project the signals to and from the embedd ing space, while the space 

itself is represented by a codebook of embeddings which are updated during training. Training is guided by 

loss terms comparing the ground truth spectrogram and raw signal to the reconstructed terms. 

The key components of the architecture lie in a transformer -style [46] encoder which encodes EEG 

channels into the embedding space, a quantizer -codebook pair [47] to quantize, store, and replace 

EEG embeddings, and a decoder which mirrors the encoder in architecture and decodes raw and 

spectral representations of the input EEG channels from the transformed embeddings. 

Model Architecture and Configuration 

Due to the high temporal resolution of EEG data, information in both the temporal and spectral 

domain is key to creating discriminable features in downstream EEG tasks. Frequency domain 

characteristics are often used to identify motor intent via Event -Rela ted Desynchronization/ 

Synchronization (ERD/ERS) [48] over the entirety of a trial. Motivated by the goal of identifying 

dynamic movements and the use of sliding window techniques in downstream online tasks, the 

architecture turns to spectrogram representations. The decoder thus attempts to reconstruct the 

spectrogram and raw signals from the embeddings to train the architecture to learn relevant 

temporal and spectral characteristics for the embeddings. The raw reconstruction loss is calculated 

with mean -squared error (MSE), while the spectrogram uses a weighted MSE, a ssigning stronger 

weights to the alpha (8 -13Hz) and beta (13 -30Hz) bands of the spectrogram for use in sensorimotor 

rhythm BCIs. These weights were determined to conform to the downstream tasks using motor 

imagery, which shows strong signatures in these ba nds. The total loss guiding the training is a 

weighted sum of the two MSE terms .

Pretraining and Finetuning 

The model configuration details were created to closely match those details found in online 

experimentation. Thus, a patch size of 200ms was set for the architecture to process the 1000Hz 

EEG data. During pretraining, the number of patches was kept at 310, representing 1 second of 

EEG data split into 5 segments over all 62 available channels. When preprocessing data for 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

pretraining, we performed only those preprocessing steps which are employed during the online 

experimentation. This consists of filtering data from between 0.5 Hz and 100 Hz to keep all relevant 

bands in the data and performing z -score normalization. Calcu lated spectrograms were also 

normalized to avoid exploding gradients. 

For online experiments and any offline analysis, finetuning of C -STEM was performed by freezing 

the weights of the encoder and codebook, then transferring the frozen weights to an architecture 

fitted with a single linear layer for classification. The data is filtered identically to the pretraining 

process and z -score normalized. The data is also reduced down to the 27 electrodes surrounding the 

motor cortex (CP, C, FC according to the modified international 10 -20 system). Self -supervised 

learning was then p erformed to further train C -STEM on the specific classification task relevant to 

the designed experiments. During online experimentation, this model was frozen and used for 

inference. 

Pretraining and finetuning were performed on eight NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs using Python 

3.9.19 and PyTorch 2.5.0 with CUDA 12.4 support, while inference was carried out on a NVIDIA 

GTX 1080 -TI using Python 3.8.4 and PyTorch 2.4.0 with CUDA 11.8 support. 

Datasets for Pretraining 

The pretraining datasets (Table 1) used were open -source EEG datasets, primarily consisting of 

upper -limb motor imagery experimentation, with a total of 146 human participants. These datasets 

provide diversity in the motor imagery (MI) control paradigms, containing left/right hand MI [34], 

[49] , finger MI [17] , and foot MI [14] , as well as task diversity, such as cursor control [14], [49] ,

continuous movements [34] , robotic control [14], [17] and hybrid visual attention paradigms [50] .

For each of the datasets, individual trials were not extracted, rather the entire session of data 

recorded was utilized for training. This approach of including motor imagery signatures, along with 

the rest, preparation, and cue states was designed to al low for the architecture to be able to recognize 

the various underlying EEG representations from not only the modality of interest, but also for 

experimentation information. Training and test sets were created by selecting 20% of subjects from 

each dataset to use for testing and the remaining subjects for training. Hyperparameters for 

pretraining and finetuning were empirically identified. 

Table 1. Descriptions of datasets used in the pretraining of C-STEM . Datasets used contain motor imagery 

experimentation and labels are available, though not used during the pretraining process. 

Dataset  Duration Used  Subject #  Tasks Performed                     

> Stieger et al [49] 596.8 Hours 62 Two -hand MI, 2D cursor control
> Forenzo et al [34] 162.4 Hours 28 Two -hand MI, Continuous 2D cursor pursuit
> Forenzo et al [14] 53.7 Hours 10 Two -hand MI, Foot MI, 2D cursor control
> Ding et al [17] 274.0 Hours 21 Single -arm Finger -level MI, robotic control
> Forenzo et al [50] 108.2 Hours 25 Two -hand MI, Overt spatial attention, 2D
> cursor and robotic control

Online Foundation Model Experimentation 

We designed a complex control paradigm which utilizes motor imagery of the right arm performing 

single -shot directional movements and evaluated the performance of C -STEM for online BCI 

control in a cohort of 11 human participants. The BCI tasks focus on cu rsor control, wherein 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

subjects are tasked to imagine directional movements in one of the four cardinal directions to move 

the cursor accordingly. Visual feedback was given either through explicit color indications of model 

predictions or through actual cursor movements. Two mod els are used randomly and blindly: a 

conventional deep learning model (EEGNet) and our proposed foundation model (C -STEM). 

Single -Arm Directional Movement Offline Paradigm (Session 1,2) 

Subjects first performed a paradigm where direction cues were given ( Figure 2C) following a path. 

Subjects were instructed to concentrate on a circular cursor on a gridded screen, and a square in one 

of the cardinal directions around the cursor would change color. The subjects then performed an 

imagined or actual directional moveme nt ( Figure 2A) that would move the cursor to the indicated 

square. Subjects repeated this process until their circle stimulus reached a specific goal square 

marked with a pattern. Each path from the start to the goal was 10 spaces, and paths were verified 

to contain a n even distribution of movements. Each movement trial lasted 3.5 seconds. The cue 

stage lasted 1 second, while subjects were given 1.5s to perform motor imagery (MI – imagined 

directional movement) or motor execution (ME – actual directional movement), wit h the wait stage 

being 1 second. Subjects were instructed to perform self -paced movements and wait for the reset 

stage to return to a neutral position. Each run consisted of 8 paths; Session 1 had 4 runs of MI and 

1 run of ME, while Session 2 conducted 5 r uns of MI and 2 runs of ME. 

Figure 2: Overview of the experimental paradigms. (A) Directional movement paradigms, with subjects 

performing directional movements from a neutral position. (B) Experimental schedule; with the first two 

sessions as offline sessions, and the last three sessions con taining online experimentation. Additionally, in 

the first half of all online sessions, subjects performed the guided movement task with a model trained on 

previous session’s data. In the second half, subjects run either free or guided movement sessions w ith a 

finetuned model trained on same -session data. (C) Visual descriptions of the guided movement task (left) 

and the free movement task (right). The guided movement task gave color -based feedback from model 

predictions, while the free movement task moved the cursor in the predicted direction. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Single -Arm Directional Motor Imagery Online Paradigm (Session 3,4,5) 

In the third and fourth sessions of the experiment, subjects followed two main paradigms designed 

to provide online feedback. 

The first paradigm was similar to the paradigm from earlier sessions, with an additional feedback 

phase, and is referred to as the guided movement task. The cue stage is reduced to 0.5 seconds, 

while the movement phase remains at 1.5 seconds with the added feedback phase for 0.5 seconds, 

and the wait phase kept at 1 second. These changes were made to keep total movement times at 3.5 

seconds. During the subject’s movement phase, the model outputs were processed to produce a 

single prediction, after which the feedback phase would highlight the predicted square. If the 

prediction aligned with the cued direction, the square would turn green; otherwise, the square would 

turn red. This provided visual feedback to the subject, who could then modulate their response s if 

necessary. 

The second paradigm developed was visually similar but removed all cues and moved the cursor 

according to the model’s prediction of the subjects’ motor intent and is referred to as the free 

movement task. Each trial is comprised of a movement phase, during which the subject performs 

the imagined movement, and a prediction phase, during which the processed outputs of the model 

are processed to a single prediction and the circle stimulus is moved accordingly. The movement 

phase is 1.5 seconds, followed by a w ait state of 1.0 seconds. All starting and goal squares were 

exactly 10 moves away, and due to the possibility of subjects never reaching the goal due to 

difficulty, a maximum of 22 attempts was given per path. 

Models used during the online sessions are trained on all data collected from previous sessions. 

During Sessions 3 and 4, the guided movement task was run first with four runs per session, 

followed by a break. During the break, the models fine -tuned with t he data collected in these first 

four runs. Following the break, the free movement task was run with the updated model, again with 

four runs per session. In Session 5, four runs of the guided movement task are performed before a 

break. During the break, th e models are finetuned with the respective labelled data from these four 

runs. Then, another four runs of the guided movement task are run using the updated model. 

All sessions used two types of models, a conventional deep learning model, EEGNet [31] , and a 

model of our proposed C -STEM foundation model. Before the break in each online session, each 

model is used for two runs each of model testing. Data collected during these test runs are labelled, 

so the data is processed trial -wise and used to finet une and update the models. After the break, the 

updated models are used for model testing in another two runs each. The choice of model during 

the runs is randomized and equally distributed across the models, for an equal comparison across 

the two models. The choice of model was not presented to the subject to avoid any biasing behavior. 

Online Decoding and Prediction Processing 

Online signal processing and model inference were performed using Python 3.8.4 scripts in the 

BCPy2000 library, allowing the EEG data to be passed to the model and outputs to be processed to 

give visual feedback or control. Every 40ms, the latest 1 second window of EEG data was 

processed. The 64 -channel EEG signal was reduced to a 27 -channel signal, by preserving only the 

electrodes surrounding the motor cortex (CP, C, FC according to the modified international 10 -20 

system). The signal was filtered between 0.5Hz and 100Hz using a fourth -order Butterworth filter, 

allowing a broadband signal to be preserved. The resulting temporally and spatially filtered data 

window is then z -score normalized and used as the input to the online inference models. 

The outputs of inference are recorded for the duration of the movement phase of the subject. At the 

end of the movement phase, there are 37 predictions, corresponding to 1.5 seconds at an interval of 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40ms. To allow enough processing time during the short trial times, the system begins processing 

the window predictions after approximately one second of predictions, creating a single prediction 

output. This post -processing finds the longest unbroken stri ng of one class prediction and assigns 

this class as the predicted class for this trial. Due to the dynamic and self -paced nature of the 

movements, the calculation of a single prediction aimed to focus on finding the presence of a 

dynamic signature immedia tely after motor onset among the rest of the signal in the trial. 

The two models used for online decoding were trained in similar manners, with each model being 

pretrained on all previous session data for 100 epochs (EEGNet) or 50 epochs (FM). Early stopping 

was employed during the training process, with a learning rate of 0.0001 (EEGNet) or 0.00001 

(FM) and a weight decay of 0.001. For the EEGNet models, this finetuning process continued 

training on all layers and parameters, while the FM finetuning continued training most of the layers 

except for the quantized codebook. 

Participants 

11 able -bodied participants (mean age: 23.9±2.12, 6 male/5 female) were recruited from the greater 

Pittsburgh area. All experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board of 

Carnegie Mellon University (IRB protocol number: STUDY2017_000 00548). Participants 

provided written informed consent. For any video recorded, participants filled out a voluntary 

additional video release form . All participants were considered non -naïve to EEG -BCI, since they 

had completed some EEG -BCI experiments prev iously, though the extent and the scope of the 

experiments were not uniform across all participants. Participants completed five sessions in total, 

with the last three sessions comprising online paradigms. 

Statistical Analysis 

Statistical testing was conducted using Python 3.9.19 scripts and the scipy.stats and statsmodels 

libraries. To identify group differences and to measure performance comparisons between models, 

two -way repeated -measures ANOVA tests were run, followed by post -hoc Wilcoxon -signed rank 

tests with Holm -Bonferroni corrections if significant effects were fo und. These comparisons were 

used for all performance metrics in the guided movement task, including the accuracy, precision 

and recall metrics, as well as the created metrics of number of hits and completion time in the free 

movement task. To quantify specific effect sizes, Cohen’s d values are calculated for a subset of 

metrics. 

RESULTS 

This study was designed to investigate the capabilities of an online -constrained foundation model 

to enable more complex control through improved decoding during EEG -BCI experiments. We first 

analyzed the decoding performance against a conventional deep le arning algorithm to examine the 

ability of foundation models to enable more robust control through decoding performance 

improvements in a challenging online experiment. To demonstrate how C -STEM addresses 

challenges facing current foundation models, we per formed analyses focusing on the model 

performance under latency constraints in online and offline settings. We also analyzed C -STEM’s 

impact on subject adaptation to the control paradigm during online experiments. Finally, we 

examined characteristics of C -STEM’s neural representations and the generalizability towards out -

of -distribution tasks. 

Online Foundation Models (C -STEM) create higher BCI performance across tasks 

We investigated the impact of using our proposed EEG foundation model in an online setting by 

analyzing the directional motor imagery performance during guided and free -movement tasks. C -

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

STEM showed a significant improvement in all metrics over EEGNet during the guided movement 

task ( Figure 3A) and the free movement task ( Figure 3B). In the guided movement task, C -STEM 

achieved a final accuracy of 51.3% in the final session ( Supplementary Figure 1) and achieved a 

mean accuracy over all online sessions of 47.5%. Alternatively, EEGNet reached a peak accuracy 

of 35.5% in the final session and a mean accuracy of 33.0% over all online sessions. During the 

free movement task, C -STEM achieved an average o f 3. 97 hits with an average completion time of 

33.8 s, while the EEGNet model reached a lower metric performance, reaching an average of 2. 75 

hits and an average completion time of 37.4s. 

Figure 3: High level performance metrics averaged over all online sessions. (A) Box -plot accuracy 

comparisons across models displaying average accuracy over the three online sessions for the guided 

movement task. Center lines indicate median values, triangle markers indicate mean values, and boxes 

extend from the lower to upper quartile. Significance testing results between groups are displayed a bove 

bars (*** for p<0.001, ** for p<0.01, * for p<0.05, n.s. if no significance found). (B) Box -plot comparisons 

across models displaying the average number of hits and the completion time metrics over the three online 

sessions for the free movement task. 

These improvements in performance metric were validated by running two -way ANOVA tests, 

which indicated a significant interaction between the metric and decoder architecture. These tests 

were conducted for each metric and revealed consistent interactions. Post -hoc Wilcoxon signed -

rank tests comparing the models showed that the average accuracy (p = 0.0057), number of hits (p 

= 0.0088) and completion time (p = 0.024) metrics were all significantly improved under the C -

STEM framework . The re was a large effect size of model choice observed for accuracy (Cohen’s 

d = 1.09 9), and moderate effect sizes of model choice observed for number of hits ( Cohen’s d = 

0.528) and completion times ( Cohen’s d = -0.586 ). 

Furthermore, to examine the underlying behaviors responsible for the improvements, we calculated 

additional metrics of precision and recall and identified class -specific differences in the model 

performances ( Figure 4, Supplementary Figure 2, Supplementary Figure 3). The improvements 

from C -STEM span both precision and recall averaged across classes, and confusion matrix analysis 

reveals that the most significant changes originate from disentanglement of the most frequently 

confused classes. In particular, C -STEM ac hieved an average precision of 0.47 and recall of 0.50, 

while EEGNet averaged a precision of 0.28, and a recall of 0.33. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4: Additional performance metrics for the guided movement tasks of the online sessions. (A) Box -

plot comparisons of F1, Recall and Precision metrics across models displaying average values over the three 

online sessions for the guided movement task. Center lines indicate median values, triangle markers indicate 

mean values, and boxes extend from the lower to upper quartile. Significance testing results between groups 

are displayed abo ve bars (*** for p<0.001, ** for p<0.01, * for p<0.05, n.s. if no significance found). (B) 

Confusion matrices calculated across all subjects separated by model configuration (EEGNet on the left, FM 

in the center), with the percent difference between models displayed on the right. Values were normalized 

against the truth values and share the same scale for visualization. 

Two -way ANOVA tests indicated significant effects of decoding architecture for these metrics, and 

post -hoc comparisons corroborated that the C -STEM metric values were significantly greater than 

EEGNet in both precision (p = 0.0007, Cohen’s d = 1.088) and r ecall (p = 0.0009, Cohen’s d = 

1.029). Much of the improvements were generated from an improved ability to predict the right 

(+25% accuracy, p = 0.0043) and down (+14% accuracy, p = 0.048) classes. 

These online results jointly demonstrate that the stringent pretraining constraints created a stronger 

decoding performance, stemming from an ability to better disentangle complex single -arm 

movements, translating to more precise control in the online sett ing. Together, these findings 

highlight the improved performance enabled by the foundation model framework in a demanding 

control paradigm across complex tasks. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Online Foundation Models demonstrate lower latency in online BCI 

To evaluate the impact of foundation models on decoding latency, offline analyses were performed 

using data collected during the online sessions. Sliding -window inference during the motor imagery 

phase revealed that C-STEM reached peak classification accuracy earlier than EEGNet 

(Supplementary Figure 4A). Specifically, peak accuracy for C-STEM occurred at 560 ms, about 

halfway through the trial, and achieved about 90% of the peak performance as early as 160 ms. 

Alternatively, EEGNet achieved peak performance at approximately 1100 ms, near the end of the 

trial, with the 90% peak performance reach ed at 840 ms. This indicates that the C-STEM framework 

is able to extract discriminative information from smaller temporal segments of EEG data. 

To further assess performance with limited temporal information, we evaluated decoding accuracy 

using shorter fixed windows (200 ms, 800 ms, and 1000 ms) for multiple foundation architectures, 

including LaBraM [38] and NeuroGPT [51] , alongside our proposed model ( Supplementary Figure 

4B). While all models exhibited reduced performance with 200 ms windows, our C-STEM 

outperformed both LaBraM and NeuroGPT on the smaller 200ms windows using our complex 

paradigm. This performance advantage was preserved for intermediate (800 ms) and longer (1000 

ms) windows. 

These findings indicate that incorporating short temporal windowing constraints during pretraining 

enhances the model’s ability to operate effectively under low -latency conditions, supporting the 

suitability for real -time BCI deployment. 

Online Foundation Models facilitate strong subject learning during BCI control tasks 

To investigate the ability of subjects to adaptively generate discriminable data, we first performed 

a mixed model -data analysis ( Supplementary Figure 5) to disentangle the impact of the model’s 

decoding performance from the model’s influence on subject adaptation. We define data subsets by 

the model used during the run (EEGNet -data and C -STEM -data) and use the frozen C -STEM and 

EEGNet for inference. The C-STEM on C -STEM -data (47.5%) significantly outperformed (p = 

0.0058) the C -STEM on EEGNet -data (39.3%), while the EEGNet model on C -STEM -data (35.9%) 

improved (p = 0.029) over the EEGNet model on EEGNet -data (33.0%). A two -way ANOVA 

revealed a significant effect of mixed model -data configuration. Subsequent post -hoc comparisons 

revealed that the only groups not significantly different were the EEGNet on C -STEM -data and C -

STEM on EEGNet -data (p = 0.64). 

Next, to assess any online adaptation effect from the same -session distributions generated by the 

subject, we evaluated the impact of same -session finetuning during the guided movement task in 

Session 5. C-STEM demonstrated a significant improvement in online decoding accuracy after 

finetuning, whereas EEGNet showed no meaningful gain ( Figure 5). Using C-STEM , mean 

accuracy increased from 47.4% before finetuning to 55.1% after finetuning (p = 0.023), 

corresponding to an average improvement of 7.90%. In contrast, EEGNet accuracy remained 

unchanged (34.9% before vs. 35.1% after; p = 0.89), with a negligible mean improvement of 0.13% .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 5: The effect of finetuning halfway through Session 5, shown on each model. (A) Box -plot 

visualizations of the improvements gained by finetuning for each model. Center lines indicate median values, 

triangle markers indicate mean values, and boxes extend from the lower to upper quartile. Sig nificance 

testing results between groups are displayed above bars (*** for p<0.001, ** for p<0.01, * for p<0.05, n.s. 

if no significance found). The average accuracy change is shown to the right. (B) Bar plot visualizations of 

the accuracy change at an ind ividual subject level. 

A two -way ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between decoder architecture and finetuning 

condition, indicating that the performance gains were architecture dependent. Direct comparison of 

improvement magnitudes confirmed that the increase achieved by C-STEM was significantly 

greater than that of EEGNet (p = 0.024). The effect size for finetuning with C-STEM was moderate 

(Cohen’s d = 0.4 53 ). 

These results collectively indicate a bidirectional benefit of the foundation model framework, where 

the subjects generate distinct session -specific data distributions under online conditions, to which 

C-STEM can adapt to more effectively. 

Custom C -STEM architecture creates generalizable neural representations 

As the proposed C -STEM architecture focuses on short EEG temporal windows to generate 

embeddings through an encoder -decoder transformer block, its primary contribution lies in the 

neural representations it produces. To evaluate the quality of the represent ations learned from the 

architecture and shaped by the pretraining constraints in C -STEM, we first visualize the pretraining 

metrics. The training loss curves ( Figure 6A) indicate that the pretraining conditions allow for 

sufficient learning of both temporal and spectral information. We also visualize reconstructions 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(Figure 6B) and find that these embedding representations preserve much of the low -frequency 

content in the signals. To visualize the utility of the embeddings created, we also compute the T -

distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) [52] , a non -deterministic, non -linear 

dimensionality reduction method for visualizing high -dimensional datasets, for both the C -STEM 

and the EEGNet model for one of the downstream finetuning tasks ( Supplementary Figure 6). These 

visualizations demonstrate that the embeddings generated from C -STEM may be more separable 

than those of the conventional EEGNet model, leading to increased downstream performance. 

Figure 6: Visualizations of qualitative (reconstructions) and quantitative (loss curves) aspects of the C -

STEM pretraining phase. (A) Display of loss components during pretraining over epochs. The leftmost curve 

displays the total training loss, as a weighted combination of the spectrogram reconstruction loss (center) 

and the raw reconstruction loss (right). Both t raining and testing curves are shown for all components. (B) 

Visualizations of the spectrogram reconstruction and the raw reconstruction from the proposed C-STEM 

pretraining process. Raw EEG signals are fed into the C -STEM architecture and outputs are calculated from 

the two heads of the decoder. On the left, a sample ground truth and reconstructed spectrogram are displayed, 

while the right shows the temporal EEG s ignal of this sample and the reconstructed temporal signal. 

To verify the utility of the representations for downstream tasks outside the pretraining distribution, 

we analyzed offline motor imagery and motor execution data collected during Sessions 1 and 2. C -

STEM showed significant improvements over EEGNet in both motor imagery ( Supplementary 

Figure 7A) and motor execution ( Supplementary Figure 7B) averaged across all subjects. C -STEM 

achieved an average accuracy of 57.6% in motor imagery and 53.8% in motor execution, while 

EEGNet achieved 52.7% and 49.0%, respectively. A two -way ANOVA revealed a significant effect 

from the decoder architecture, a nd post -hoc accuracy comparisons revealed that the improvement 

in accuracy was significant in both motor imagery (p = 0.024) and motor execution (p = 0.0068). 

These results indicate that the proposed C -STEM architecture and pretraining constraints produce 

information -rich embeddings that enhance separability in downstream tasks, yielding neural 

representations that generalize across tasks and modalities. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

DISCUSSION 

This study presents a foundation model framework (online C -STEM) that advances motor imagery 

brain -computer interfaces by designing online -constrained foundation models for decoding in the 

BCI loop. This approach provides insight into the potential of foun dation models to increase 

complexity of control and tasks in BCI systems. By incorporating online constraints to guide the 

pretraining of C -STEM, we establish a framework that translates the demonstrated offline 

advantages of foundation model principles [40], [51], [53], [54] towards online BCI applications. 

After three sessions, subjects achieved a final accuracy of 51.3% in a two -dimensional cursor 

control task using a challenging single -arm control paradigm with C -STEM, representing a 15.8% 

improvement over conventional dee p learning models and a 26.3% increase above chance. 

Improvements in free movement metrics further corroborate these performance gains between 

models. Together, these findings demonstrate the enhanced decoding performance and subject 

adaptation enabled by the framework, highlighting the potential of foundation models to support 

intuitive control and more complex tasks in real -time BCI applications. 

A main innovation underpinning the improved performance originates from the incorporation of 

online constraints in the pretraining and the architecture of the decoder. Deep learning techniques 

have been shown to improve EEG decoding through complex learnin g strategies [55], [56], [57] ,

which have in turn enabled more complex control within BCI experimentation [17], [34] . As an 

extension of deep learning, foundation models strive to learn general representations of EEG from 

large datasets. This implies that useful task -agnostic characteristics can be inferred from EEG 

signals, which have indeed demonstrated strong utility in downstream offline tasks [40], [44], [53], 

[54] . However, online experimentation introduces additional constraints, particularly in latency for 

real -time feedback and limited signal pre -processing. Many current pretraining methods are not 

conducive to these restrictions, resulting in a lack of adaptabi lity to online settings. These 

limitations represent a gap between the offline development of deep learning and foundation models 

in EEG and the online implementation and performance of these models in a closed -loop BCI. By 

not addressing these constraints , current EEG foundation models’ practicality in real -time, online 

BCI applications remain limited. 

Our method bridges this gap between offline improvements and online application through the use 

of online constraints in the pretraining phase and architecture. This approach is significant for the 

field of EEG -BCI, as improvements in decoding accuracy for BCI tasks can be most impactful 

when they are able to be incorporated into online applications. While current EEG foundation 

models use temporal windows of 1 second [38], [45] or more [51] , C -STEM looks towards smaller 

temporal windows of 200 ms, allowing for a more flexible configuration in downstream tasks. This 

design choice, coupled with a spectrogram reconstruction task in pretraining, allowed the model to 

learn smaller building blocks of EEG representations which still contained important spectral and 

temporal information ( Figure 6B). We used these neural representations on out -of -distribution tasks 

such as motor execution ( Supplementary Figure 7B) which were underrepresented in the pretraining 

set, and found improvements over conventional deep learning. This implies that unlabeled EEG 

contains learnable, widespread characteristics which can be used to improve unseen task decoding, 

even for online settings and applications. 

Importantly, these representations create an advantage over other EEG foundation model 

representations in that these representations can be effectively used in online settings. Due to the 

design choices during pretraining, C -STEM is less impacted by decreasing temporal window sizes, 

while other current EEG foundation models do not handle the stringent constraints as well 

(Supplementary Figure 4B). While many offline tasks focus solely on trial -wise accuracy, the 

importance of these findings lies in the application to real -time control, which strives to provide 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

feedback to subjects in a timely manner for applications such as robotic control. Our architecture 

reached stable prediction performance earlier in the trial window than conventional deep learning 

(Supplementary Figure 4A), This indicates that the C -STEM architecture can provide feedback 

faster than other methods, reducing latency and facilitating smooth and responsive control. 

Generally, a temporal window of one second can be acceptable for real -time feedback [14], [17] in 

continuous paradigms. However, paradigms which rely on single, dynamic movements may see a 

more compounded effect from the latency. Thus, the lower -latency characteristic, demonstrated in 

the C -STEM framework, is essential for BCI decoders to be practi cal in real -time, dynamic control 

applications. 

Another main contribution of the study is the demonstration of the ability from the C -STEM 

framework to enable single -arm, dynamic movement control on a demanding task. Using C -STEM 

resulted in significant improvement over the conventional deep learning in both the simpler guided 

task ( Figure 3A) and the more complex free movement task ( Figure 3B). This suggests that the 

neural representations learned by foundation models can translate to better disentanglement of 

spatially and temporally complex EEG signals. Additional analysis in the per -class performance of 

the models ( Figure 4, Supplementary Figure 2, Supplementary Figure 3) reveals that the strongest 

confusions were between left/right movements and up/down movements, indicating that 

movements within the same plane are more entangled spatially [58] and may cause more difficulty 

in decoding. Differences between the model confusion matrices ( Figure 4B) indicate that much of 

C-STEM’s improved prediction accuracy arises from better disentanglement of left/right and 

up/down confusions, as well as moving away from the single -class default prediction that often 

characterizes poorly trained deep learning cl assifiers. This improvement suggests that C -STEM 

may not provide a uniform improvement across all classes, instead addressing biomechanical and 

model -specific issues. Overall, the improvement over the conventional deep learning methods 

implies that foundat ion model frameworks can advance the field of EEG -BCI towards two 

dimensions in parallel: the complexity of control mechanism and the difficulty of the online task. 

Importantly, the C -STEM framework was also found to facilitate subject learning during the task. 

Through mixed model -data analyses, we find that data collected with C -STEM was more 

discriminable, allowing higher performance by EEGNet, and that this effect was reversed for data 

collected with EEGNet ( Supplementary Figure 5B). This suggests that in addition to C -STEM’s 

stronger decoding ability over EEGNet, C -STEM also encourages subjects to generate a more 

discriminable data distribution. This implies that an online foundation model aligns better with the 

subject’s modulati on of activity, eliciting a co -adaptive effect during the online decoding task. 

Further evidence comes from the performance improvement observed with mid -session finetuning 

(Figure 5A), where the C -STEM framework achieves stronger performance by incorporating 

information from the same -session distribution, although this effect does not extend to all subjects 

(Figure 5B). Together, these results suggest that the benefits of the foundation model framework 

extend beyond decoding ability, to facilitate stronger subject adaptation to the control mechanism 

during BCI. This finding further demonstrates the value of incorporat ing increasingly complex 

models such as C -STEM into BCI applications, as tasks become more difficult and require more 

subject attention. 

While this study presents improvements from the C -STEM framework for more complex BCI 

applications, several limitations should be considered. One such limitation lies in participant 

selection, as all subjects were able -bodied adults with previous experienc e using EEG -BCI. By 

selecting subjects who had previously completed motor imagery EEG -BCI experiments, the sample 

is more likely to generate strong MI signals, potentially leading to improved performance. This 

behavior may not be representative of the broa der able -bodied population, which likely exhibits a 

wider range of performance. In the general population, approximately 15 -30% of individuals are 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

unable to generate strong motor imagery signals, exhibiting the phenomenon of BCI illiteracy [59] 

during motor imagery tasks. Online results indicate that on average, subjects performed above 

chance level regardless of the algorithm used; however, it remains unclear whether this performance 

is attributable to the subjects’ prior EEG -BCI experience or to the complexity of the paradigm. It 

is also unknown whether the findings of this study would extend to clinical populations such as 

stroke survivors or individuals with paralysis, as these groups were not strongly represented in the 

pretraining dataset. Future work may therefore investigate the impact of foundation model 

frameworks for decoding in online experiments involving BCI -naïve subjects, BCI non -responders, 

or participants from clinical populations. 

Another limitation lies in the design of the proposed C -STEM framework, which contains a 

relatively small number of parameters, compared with foundation models in other modalities, such 

as large language models. An EEG foundation model focused solely on mo tor imagery is inherently 

limited by the amount of available open -source motor imagery EEG data. Model components —

such as the number of embeddings stored in the codebook, the dimensionality of the latent 

embedding space, and the number of transformer block s in the encoder —could potentially be 

increased with substantial expansion of the pretraining dataset. Accordingly, one direction for 

future work would be to aggregate a larger corpus of EEG motor imagery data, which could increase 

both the diversity of th e dataset and the complexity of the model, thereby further improving 

downstream performance. A challenge in this effort would be aligning data from the multitude 

sources and ensuring that important characteristics, such as sampling rate, are properly stand ardized 

across the dataset. 

In this study, we used EEGNet as a representative for conventional deep learning architectures, as 

it has been widely evaluated in BCI research by many groups and has further demonstrated 

efficiency as a small, personalized model in online BCI experimentat ion. Future investigations may 

also examine deep learning architectures with increased complexity or transfer learning techniques 

to determine whether the current findings hold across variation in deep learning approaches. 

CONCLUSION 

Studies in EEG -BCI have increasingly sought to achieve more intuitive control of external devices 

in complex tasks. In this study, we propose a foundation model architecture (C -STEM) pretrained 

on a large corpus of motor imagery data, with spectrogram reco nstruction and online constraints 

guiding the pretraining process. We evaluate this model on demanding cursor control tasks using a 

single -arm, dynamic, directional control scheme. The model is evaluated in online experiments 

alongside a conventional deep learning architecture for comparison. Our results show that C -STEM 

achieves a final online accuracy of 51.3% in the four -class guided task, representing a 26.3% 

increase from the chance level of 25% and a 15.8% increase from the conventional deep learning 

EEGNet model. In addition, C -STEM demonstrates higher completion rates and lower completion 

times during a free -movement task. These results demonstrate the promise of EEG foundation 

models for online experimentation and represent a step towards enabling m ore complex control 

paradigms in motor imagery -based EEG -BCI systems. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: 

Author contributions: Conceptualization: M.K. and B.H. Methodology: M.K., H.W, and B.H. 

Data Collection: M.K., H.W., Z.J., and Y.D. Formal data analysis and visualization: M.K. Original 

manuscript writing: M.K. and H.W. Reviewing and editing: M.K., H.W., and B.H. Funding and 

resource acquisition: B.H. Supervision: B.H. 

Funding: 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health grants NS124564 (PI: BH), 

NS131069 (PI: BH), NS127849 (PI: BH), and NS096761 (PI: BH). MK was supported in part by 

NIH T32 training grant EB029365 (PI: BH). 

REFERENCES 

[1] B. He, H. Yuan, J. Meng, and S. Gao, “Brain –Computer Interfaces,” in Neural Engineering , B. He, Ed., Cham: 

Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 131 –183. doi: 10.1007/978 -3-030 -43395 -6_4. 

[2] B. J. Edelman, S. Zhang, G. Schalk, P. Brunner, G. Müller -Putz, C. Guan, and B. He, “Non -Invasive Brain -

Computer Interfaces: State of the Art and Trends,” IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering , vol. 18, pp. 26 –

49, 2025, doi: 10.1109/RBME.2024.3449790. 

[3] L. R. Hochberg, D. Bacher, B. Jarosiewicz, N. Y. Masse, J. D. Simeral, J. Vogel, S. Haddadin, J. Liu, S. S. 

Cash, P. van der Smagt, and J. P. Donoghue, “Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally 

controlled robotic arm,” Nature , vol. 485, no. 7398, pp. 372 –375, May 2012, doi: 10.1038/nature11076. 

[4] J. L. Collinger, B. Wodlinger, J. E. Downey, W. Wang, E. C. Tyler -Kabara, D. J. Weber, A. J. McMorland, M. 

Velliste, M. L. Boninger, and A. B. Schwartz, “High -performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual 

with tetraplegia,” The Lancet , vol. 381, no. 9866, pp. 557 –564, Feb. 2013, doi: 10.1016/S0140 -6736(12)61816 -

9. 

[5] S. L. Metzger, J. R. Liu, D. A. Moses, M. E. Dougherty, M. P. Seaton, K. T. Littlejohn, J. Chartier, G. K. 

Anumanchipalli, A. Tu -Chan, K. Ganguly, and E. F. Chang, “Generalizable spelling using a speech 

neuroprosthesis in an individual with severe limb an d vocal paralysis,” Nat Commun , vol. 13, no. 1, p. 6510, 

Nov. 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41467 -022 -33611 -3. 

[6] N. S. Card, M. Wairagkar, C. Iacobacci, X. Hou, T. Singer -Clark, F. R. Willett, E. M. Kunz, C. Fan, M. V. Nia, 

D. R. Deo, A. Srinivasan, E. Y. Choi, M. F. Glasser, L. R. Hochberg, J. M. Henderson, K. Shahlaie, S. D. 

Stavisky, and D. M. Brandman, “An Accur ate and Rapidly Calibrating Speech Neuroprosthesis,” New England 

Journal of Medicine , vol. 391, no. 7, pp. 609 –618, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2314132. 

[7] X. Gu, Z. Cao, A. Jolfaei, P. Xu, D. Wu, T. -P. Jung, and C. -T. Lin, “EEG -Based Brain -Computer Interfaces 

(BCIs): A Survey of Recent Studies on Signal Sensing Technologies and Computational Intelligence 

Approaches and Their Applications,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics ,

vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1645 –1666, Sep. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TCBB.2021.3052811. 

[8] J. R. Wolpaw and D. J. McFarland, “Control of a two -dimensional movement signal by a noninvasive brain -

computer interface in humans,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 101, no. 51, pp. 17849 –

17854, Dec. 2004, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0403504101. 

[9] A. J. Doud, J. P. Lucas, M. T. Pisansky, and B. He, “Continuous Three -Dimensional Control of a Virtual 

Helicopter Using a Motor Imagery Based Brain -Computer Interface,” PLOS ONE , vol. 6, no. 10, p. e26322, 

Oct. 2011, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026322. 

[10] K. LaFleur, K. Cassady, A. Doud, K. Shades, E. Rogin, and B. He, “Quadcopter control in three -dimensional 

space using a noninvasive motor imagery -based brain –computer interface,” J. Neural Eng. , vol. 10, no. 4, p. 

046003, Jun. 2013, doi: 10.1088/1741 -2560/10/4/046003. 

[11] J. Meng, S. Zhang, A. Bekyo, J. Olsoe, B. Baxter, and B. He, “Noninvasive Electroencephalogram Based 

Control of a Robotic Arm for Reach and Grasp Tasks,” Sci Rep , vol. 6, no. 1, p. 38565, Dec. 2016, doi: 

10.1038/srep38565. 

[12] L. Cao, G. Li, Y. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Shu, and D. Zhang, “A brain -actuated robotic arm system using non -

invasive hybrid brain –computer interface and shared control strategy,” J. Neural Eng. , vol. 18, no. 4, p. 

046045, May 2021, doi: 10.1088/1741 -2552/abf8cb. 

[13] J. -H. Jeong, K. -H. Shim, D. -J. Kim, and S. -W. Lee, “Brain -Controlled Robotic Arm System Based on Multi -

Directional CNN -BiLSTM Network Using EEG Signals,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and 

Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1226 –1238, May 2020, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2020.2981659. 

[14] D. Forenzo, Y. Zhang, G. F. Wittenberg, and B. He, “Continuous Reaching and Grasping With a BCI 

Controlled Robotic Arm in Healthy and Stroke -Affected Individuals,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems 

and Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 33, pp. 3888 –3899, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2025.3611821. 

[15] T. Jia, J. Sun, C. McGeady, L. Ji, and C. Li, “Enhancing Brain –Computer Interface Performance by 

Incorporating Brain -to -Brain Coupling,” Cyborg and Bionic Systems , vol. 5, p. 0116, Apr. 2024, doi: 

10.34133/cbsystems.0116. 

[16] B. J. Edelman, J. Meng, D. Suma, C. Zurn, E. Nagarajan, B. S. Baxter, C. C. Cline, and B. He, “Noninvasive 

neuroimaging enhances continuous neural tracking for robotic device control,” Science Robotics , vol. 4, no. 31, 

p. eaaw6844, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.aaw6844. 

[17] Y. Ding, C. Udompanyawit, Y. Zhang, and B. He, “EEG -based brain -computer interface enables real -time 

robotic hand control at individual finger level,” Nat Commun , vol. 16, no. 1, p. 5401, Jun. 2025, doi: 

10.1038/s41467 -025 -61064 -x. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[18] L. Tonin, S. Perdikis, T. D. Kuzu, J. Pardo, B. Orset, K. Lee, M. Aach, T. A. Schildhauer, R. Martínez -Olivera, 

and J. del R. Millán, “Learning to control a BMI -driven wheelchair for people with severe tetraplegia,” 

iScience , vol. 25, no. 12, p. 105418, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105418. 

[19] X. Chen, Y. Yu, J. Tang, L. Zhou, K. Liu, Z. Liu, S. Chen, J. Wang, L. -L. Zeng, J. Liu, and D. Hu, “Clinical 

Validation of BCI -Controlled Wheelchairs in Subjects With Severe Spinal Cord Injury,” IEEE Transactions on 

Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 30, pp. 579 –589, 2022, doi: 

10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3156661. 

[20] L. Ferrero, V. Quiles, M. Ortiz, E. Iáñez, Á. Gil -Agudo, and J. M. Azorín, “Brain -computer interface enhanced 

by virtual reality training for controlling a lower limb exoskeleton,” iScience , vol. 26, no. 5, p. 106675, May 

2023, doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.106675. 

[21] A. L. Benabid, T. Costecalde, A. Eliseyev, G. Charvet, A. Verney, S. Karakas, M. Foerster, A. Lambert, B. 

Morinière, N. Abroug, M. -C. Schaeffer, A. Moly, F. Sauter -Starace, D. Ratel, C. Moro, N. Torres -Martinez, L. 

Langar, M. Oddoux, M. Polosan, S. Pezzan i, V. Auboiroux, T. Aksenova, C. Mestais, and S. Chabardes, “An 

exoskeleton controlled by an epidural wireless brain –machine interface in a tetraplegic patient: a proof -of -

concept demonstration,” The Lancet Neurology , vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 1112 –1122, De c. 2019, doi: 

10.1016/S1474 -4422(19)30321 -7. 

[22] S. P. van den Broek, F. Reinders, M. Donderwinkel, and M. J. Peters, “Volume conduction effects in EEG and 

MEG,” Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology , vol. 106, no. 6, pp. 522 –534, Jun. 1998, doi: 

10.1016/S0013 -4694(97)00147 -8. 

[23] N. Srisrisawang and G. R. Müller -Putz, “Simultaneous encoding of speed, distance, and direction in discrete 

reaching: an EEG study,” J. Neural Eng. , vol. 21, no. 6, p. 066042, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1088/1741 -2552/ada0ea. 

[24] V. Mondini, A. -I. Sburlea, and G. R. Müller -Putz, “Towards unlocking motor control in spinal cord injured by 

applying an online EEG -based framework to decode motor intention, trajectory and error processing,” Sci Rep ,

vol. 14, no. 1, p. 4714, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1038/s41598 -024 -55413 -x. 

[25] Z. Ma, X. Yang, J. Meng, K. Wang, M. Xu, and D. Ming, “Decoding Arm Movement Direction Using Ultra -

High -Density EEG,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 4035 –4045, Jun. 

2025, doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2025.3545856. 

[26] N. Robinson, C. Guan, A. P. Vinod, K. Keng Ang, and K. Peng Tee, “Multi -class EEG classification of 

voluntary hand movement directions,” J. Neural Eng. , vol. 10, no. 5, p. 056018, Sep. 2013, doi: 10.1088/1741 -

2560/10/5/056018. 

[27] Y. Wang and T. -P. Jung, “A Collaborative Brain -Computer Interface for Improving Human Performance,” 

PLOS ONE , vol. 6, no. 5, p. e20422, May 2011, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020422. 

[28] X. Lu, Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Zhou, D. Wu, and M. Zhang, “Electroencephalography Enables Continuous 

Decoding of Hand Motion Angles in Polar Coordinates,” Cyborg and Bionic Systems , vol. 7, p. 0469, Jan. 

2026, doi: 10.34133/cbsystems.0469. 

[29] H. Yuan, C. Perdoni, and B. He, “Relationship between speed and EEG activity during imagined and executed 

hand movements,” J. Neural Eng. , vol. 7, no. 2, p. 026001, Feb. 2010, doi: 10.1088/1741 -2560/7/2/026001. 

[30] J. -H. Kim, F. Bießmann, and S. -W. Lee, “Decoding Three -Dimensional Trajectory of Executed and Imagined 

Arm Movements From Electroencephalogram Signals,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and 

Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 867 –876, Sep. 2015, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2014.2375879. 

[31] V. J. Lawhern, A. J. Solon, N. R. Waytowich, S. M. Gordon, C. P. Hung, and B. J. Lance, “EEGNet: A 

Compact Convolutional Network for EEG -based Brain -Computer Interfaces,” J. Neural Eng. , vol. 15, no. 5, p. 

056013, Oct. 2018, doi: 10.1088/1741 -2552/aace8c. 

[32] S. Sakhavi, C. Guan, and S. Yan, “Learning Temporal Information for Brain -Computer Interface Using 

Convolutional Neural Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 29, no. 

11, pp. 5619 –5629, Nov. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2018.2789927. 

[33] Y. Song, Q. Zheng, B. Liu, and X. Gao, “EEG Conformer: Convolutional Transformer for EEG Decoding and 

Visualization,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 31, pp. 710 –719, 

2023, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3230250. 

[34] D. Forenzo, H. Zhu, J. Shanahan, J. Lim, and B. He, “Continuous tracking using deep learning -based decoding 

for noninvasive brain -computer interface,” PNAS Nexus , vol. 3, no. 4, p. pgae145, Apr. 2024, doi: 

10.1093/pnasnexus/pgae145. 

[35] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever, “Improving Language Understanding by Generative 

Pre -Training,” OpenAI, Technical Report, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://cdn.openai.com/research -

covers/language -unsupervised/language_understandi ng_paper.pdf 

[36] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, 

G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision,” 

presented at the International conference on machine learning, 2021, pp. 8748 –8763. doi: 

10.48550/ARXIV.2103.00020. 

[37] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. 

Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale,” presented at the Internation Conference of Machine Learning, 

Jun. 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2010.11929. 

[38] W. Jiang, L. Zhao, and B. Lu, “Large Brain Model for Learning Generic Representations with Tremendous 

EEG Data in BCI,” presented at the Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, May 2024. 

Accessed: Jan. 31, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=QzTpTRVtrP 

[39] C. Yang, M. B. Westover, and J. Sun, “BIOT: Cross -data Biosignal Learning in the Wild,” presented at the 

Thirty -seventh Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Dec. 2023. doi: 

10.48550/arXiv.2305.10351. 

[40] J. Wang, S. Zhao, Z. Luo, Y. Zhou, H. Jiang, S. Li, T. Li, and G. Pan, “CBraMod: A Criss -Cross Brain 

Foundation Model for EEG Decoding,” presented at the Thirteenth International Conference on Learning 

Representations, Apr. 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2412. 07236. 

[41] D. Wu, S. Li, J. Yang, and M. Sawan, “Neuro -BERT: Rethinking Masked Autoencoding for Self -Supervised 

Neurological Pretraining,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , pp. 1 –11, 2024, doi: 

10.1109/JBHI.2024.3415959. 

[42] C. Wang, V. Subramaniam, A. U. Yaari, G. Kreiman, B. Katz, I. Cases, and A. Barbu, “BrainBERT: Self -

supervised representation learning for intracranial recordings,” presented at the The Eleventh International 

Conference on Learning Representations, May 20 23. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.14367. 

[43] J. Zhou, Y. Duan, Y. -C. Chang, Y. -K. Wang, and C. -T. Lin, “BELT: Bootstrapped EEG -to -Language Training 

by Natural Language Supervision,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 

32, pp. 3278 –3288, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2024.3450795. 

[44] D. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Luo, S. Lian, and D. Wu, “MIRepNet: A Pipeline and Foundation Model for EEG -Based 

Motor Imagery Classification,” Jul. 27, 2025, arXiv : arXiv:2507.20254. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2507.20254. 

[45] W. -B. Jiang, Y. Wang, B. -L. Lu, and D. Li, “NeuroLM: A Universal Multi -task Foundation Model for 

Bridging the Gap between Language and EEG Signals,” presented at the Thirteenth International Conference 

on Learning Representations, Apr. 2025. doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2409.00101. 

[46] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, 

“Attention Is All You Need,” presented at the Thirty -first Annual Conference on Neural Information 

Processing Systems, Aug. 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.170 6.03762. 

[47] A. van den Oord, O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Neural Discrete Representation Learning,” presented at 

the Thirty -first Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, May 2018. doi: 

10.48550/arXiv.1711.00937. 

[48] G. Pfurtscheller and F. H. Lopes da Silva, “Event -related EEG/MEG synchronization and desynchronization: 

basic principles,” Clin Neurophysiol , vol. 110, no. 11, pp. 1842 –1857, Nov. 1999, doi: 10.1016/s1388 -

2457(99)00141 -8. 

[49] J. R. Stieger, S. A. Engel, and B. He, “Continuous sensorimotor rhythm based brain computer interface 

learning in a large population,” Sci Data , vol. 8, no. 1, p. 98, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41597 -021 -00883 -1. 

[50] D. Forenzo, Y. Liu, J. Kim, Y. Ding, T. Yoon, and B. He, “Integrating Simultaneous Motor Imagery and 

Spatial Attention for EEG -BCI Control,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 

282 –294, Jan. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TBME.2023.3298957. 

[51] W. Cui, W. Jeong, P. Thölke, T. Medani, K. Jerbi, A. A. Joshi, and R. M. Leahy, “Neuro -GPT: Towards A 

Foundation Model for EEG,” presented at the 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, 

IEEE, 2024, pp. 1 –5. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2311.03764. 

[52] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing Data using t -SNE,” Journal of Machine Learning Research ,

vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579 –2605, 2008. 

[53] G. Wang, W. Liu, Y. He, C. Xu, L. Ma, and H. Li, “EEGPT: Pretrained Transformer for Universal and 

Reliable Representation of EEG Signals,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 

39249 –39280, Dec. 2024. 

[54] Y. E. Ouahidi, J. Lys, P. Thölke, N. Farrugia, B. Pasdeloup, V. Gripon, K. Jerbi, and G. Lioi, “REVE: A 

Foundation Model for EEG -- Adapting to Any Setup with Large -Scale Pretraining on 25,000 Subjects,” 

presented at the Thirty -ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Dec. 2025. doi: 

10.48550/arXiv.2510.21585. 

[55] J. Wang, L. Yao, and Y. Wang, “Enhanced Online Continuous Brain -Control by Deep Learning -Based EEG 

Decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 33, pp. 2834 –2846, 

2025, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2025.3591254. 

[56] Z. Tang, H. Wang, Z. Cui, X. Jin, L. Zhang, Y. Peng, and B. Xing, “An Upper -Limb Rehabilitation 

Exoskeleton System Controlled by MI Recognition Model With Deep Emphasized Informative Features in a 

VR Scene,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 31, pp. 4390 –4401, 

2023, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2023.3329059. 

[57] J. -H. Cho, J. -H. Jeong, and S. -W. Lee, “NeuroGrasp: Real -Time EEG Classification of High -Level Motor 

Imagery Tasks Using a Dual -Stage Deep Learning Framework,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 52, 

no. 12, pp. 13279 –13292, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2021.3122969. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[58] S. T. Grafton, R. P. Woods, and J. C. Mazziotta, “Within -arm somatotopy in human motor areas determined by 

positron emission tomography imaging of cerebral blood flow,” Exp Brain Res , vol. 95, no. 1, pp. 172 –176, 

Jul. 1993, doi: 10.1007/BF00229666. 

[59] T. Dickhaus, C. Sannelli, K. -R. Müller, G. Curio, and B. Blankertz, “Predicting BCI performance to study BCI 

illiteracy,” BMC Neuroscience , vol. 10, no. 1, p. P84, Jul. 2009, doi: 10.1186/1471 -2202 -10 -S1 -P84. 

[60] M. X. Cohen, “A better way to define and describe Morlet wavelets for time -frequency analysis,” Neuroimage ,

vol. 199, pp. 81 –86, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.05.048.