Title: ActivityNarrated: An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.00767v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 01:05:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding 

## LALA SHAKTI SWARUP RAY, DFKI, Germany 

## MENGXI LIU, DFKI, Germany 

## ALCINA PINTO, RPTU and DFKI, Germany 

## DEEPIKA GURUNG, RPTU and DFKI, Germany 

## DANIEL GEISSLER, DFKI, Germany 

## PAUL LUKOWICZ, RPTU and DFKI, Germany 

## BO ZHOU, RPTU and DFKI, Germany LLM Prompting What activity the person is doing , if the 

imu signal at [Position 1] of length of 

[S] seconds looks like this ?

ActNarrator 

The person is jumping five times while 

swinging arms .

Can you classify it to one activitiy out of 

these 23? 

Jump 

Contemporary 

Windowed 

Classifier 

> Stand Jump Jump
> Jump Jump Jump
> Jump Stand Jump

Jump 

Majoritiy 

vote 

ActivityNarrated 

Dataset 

Hard Label Only 

Dataset 

Open -ended activity narratives 

Unconstrained naturalistic 

activities with open -ended 

narrative annotations 

Closed -set activities often 

with in -the -lab artificial 

repetitions 

Fig. 1. A conceptual shift from windowed, closed-set classification to open-ended activity narrations, where wearable sensor streams are interpreted as semantically rich activity narratives rather than forcefully mapped into fixed labels 

Wearable human activity recognition (HAR) has made steady progress, yet much of this progress is grounded in a closed-set classification paradigm that limits real-world applicability. In practice, human activities are open-ended, unscripted, personalized, and often compositional, forming narratives rather than instances of predefined classes. We show that addressing 

Authors’ Contact Information: Lala Shakti Swarup Ray, DFKI, Kaiserslautern, Germany, lala_shakti_swarup.ray@dfki.de; Mengxi Liu, DFKI, Kaiserslautern, Germany, mengxi.liu@dfki.de; Alcina Pinto, RPTU and DFKI, Kaiserslautern, Germany, alcina_alfred.pinto@dfki.de; Deepika gurung, RPTU and DFKI, Kaiserslautern, Germany, Deepika.Gurung@dfki.de; Daniel Geißler, DFKI, Kaiserslautern, Germany, daniel.geissler@dfki.de; Paul Lukowicz, RPTU and DFKI, Kaiserslautern, Germany, Paul.Lukowicz@dfki.de; Bo Zhou, bo.zhou@dfki.de, RPTU and DFKI, Kaiserslautern, Germany. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 2474-9567/2024/1-ART1 https://doi.org/10.1145/3459666 Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024.   

> arXiv:2604.00767v1 [cs.LG] 1 Apr 2026 1:2 •Ray et al.

this reality is not a matter of scaling existing datasets or models, but of fundamentally changing how wearable HAR is formulated, supervised, and evaluated. This work demonstrates how to model and learn from open-ended activity narratives by aligning wearable sensor data with natural-language descriptions in an open-vocabulary setting, through an integrated paradigm comprising three essential components. First, we introduce a naturalistic data collection and annotation methodology that pairs multi-position wearable sensing with free-form, time-aligned narrative descriptions of ongoing behavior, allowing activity semantics to emerge without a predefined vocabulary. Second, we establish a retrieval-based evaluation framework that measures semantic alignment between sensor data and language, enabling principled evaluation without fixed classes while strictly subsuming closed-set classification as a special case. Third, we present a language-conditioned learning architecture that supports sensor-to-text inference over variable-length sensor streams and heterogeneous sensor placements. Experiments demonstrate that models trained under fixed-label objectives degrade sharply under real-world variability, whereas open-vocabulary sensor–language alignment yields robust, semantically grounded representations. Crucially, once such alignment is learned, closed-set activity recognition becomes a straightforward downstream task: under cross-participant evaluation, our approach achieves 65.3% Macro-F1, compared to 31–34% for strong closed-set HAR baselines. These results establish open-ended narrative modeling as a practical and effective foundation for real-world wearable HAR. CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Model development and analysis .Additional Key Words and Phrases: Human activity recognition, Wearable sensor, Inertial measurement unit, Open vocabulary activity recognition 

ACM Reference Format: 

Lala Shakti Swarup Ray, Mengxi Liu, Alcina Pinto, Deepika gurung, Daniel Geißler, Paul Lukowicz, and Bo Zhou. 2024. 

ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 1, 1, Article 1 (January 2024), 34 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3459666 

1 Introduction 

Wearable Human Activity Recognition (HAR) has made consistent progress on standard benchmarks [ 1 , 16 , 32 , 34 ], yet this progress remains weakly connected to real-world deployment. The dominant method formulations are built around a closed-set classification paradigm: data are collected under scripted protocols, segmented into fixed-size temporal windows, recorded from standardized sensor placements, and labeled using limited, predefined activity categories [ 16 , 30 , 47 ]. Within these controlled constraints, models achieve strong benchmark performance; outside them, performance degrades sharply. This mismatch reflects a way of thinking in HAR that treats activities as elements of a fixed taxonomy and frames learning as selecting among known classes. Everyday human behavior is unscripted, personalized, long-tailed, and often concurrent (e.g., walking while gesturing, cooking while conversing) [ 51 ]. Individuals choose what to do, how to do it, and how long to do it, producing behaviors that are neither temporally uniform nor semantically identical across users. As a result, the closed-set, fixed-window, fixed-placement formulation provides only a partial view of activity understanding: it captures performance on a narrow slice of behaviors while suppressing the dominant sources of real-world variability. Yet, many of the most impactful wearable applications lie outside controlled scripts. Assistive technologies, longitudinal health monitoring, context-aware interfaces, and in-the-wild behavioral studies all require systems that adapt to individuals and evolving contexts rather than a fixed activity taxonomy [ 51 , 53 ]. In such settings, the activity space is inherently open-ended. A common response to this gap is to scale existing closed-set HAR pipelines: collect more data, expand taxonomies, update weights (few-shot, continual learning) or train larger models. Yet even if a system could reliably recognize hundreds of predefined activities (orders of magnitude more than current datasets), a fundamental question remains: would wearable HAR be solved if every new user, context, or combination of actions still falls outside the taxonomy? In real-world settings, the problem is not the size of the label set, but the assumption that open-end behavior can be fully enumerated by predefined categories. Adding classes does not eliminate the long tail, fixed windows still impose arbitrary temporal boundaries, and accuracy or F1 remain ill-defined when multiple 

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024.

ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding • 1:3 Contemporary closed -set paradigm Proposed open -ended narrative paradigm                                                                   

> Contemporary HAR
> Encoder and Classifier
> Statistical metrics (Accuracy, F1)
> What is the person doing if their imu
> signal at wrist and ankle of around 7
> seconds long looks like this ?
> The person is jumping four
> times while swinging their arm.
> Classification is constrained into
> fixed -length windows , from a
> finite list of predefined activities
> 1... ... ... ... ... ... 121
> 87% ... ... ... ... ... ... 90% 80% 91%
> Most Likely Class
> Probability
> Adjustable activity duration is
> resorted to temporal
> V6V13 V13 V21 VxV6V13 V21 V21
> ……….. Sensors aligned and tokenized to
> an unrestricted open -vocabulary
> Natural language narrative of the
> unstructured activity
> Open -vocabulary metrics
> (Recall, Reciprocal Rank)
> Participants following
> scripted instructions
> with repetitions
> Participants act naturally
> according to their own
> choice in a non -restrictive
> environment
> Annotation:
> labels from a
> predefined list of
> actions
> Annotation:
> Open -end activity descriptions
> of arbitrary durations without
> fixed taxonomy
> Sensor -Language
> Generation
> Can you classify it between among
> these fixed actions ?
> 1
> Downstream task prompting
> Most likely class Statistical metrics (Accuracy, F1)
> Signal recovery
> Representation
> metrics
> For comparison with
> contemporary HAR
> To check the quality of
> the Open -end narratives
> To check the fidelity on
> translated signals
> ...
> Restricted data collection with closed -set annotation Naturalistic data collection with narrative annotation
> Classification Constrained by windows and label lists Unconstrained Inference adaptable to a wide variety of factors

Fig. 2. Conceptual comparison between prevailing wearable HAR pipelines and the open-vocabulary paradigm introduced in this work. Prior approaches rely on fixed-size windows, standardized sensor layouts, and closed-set classification, leading to brittle performance under sensor shift, missing sensors, and long-tailed behaviors. In contrast, the proposed open-vocabulary paradigm models activities as open-ended narratives by grounding variable-length, multi-position sensor streams in a language embedding space, subsuming closed-set HAR classification as a special narrow scope downstream task. 

descriptions can validly apply to the same behavior. The limitation is therefore conceptual rather than incremental: scaling datasets or models within this formulation does not resolve the underlying misalignment. We propose that realizing robust real-world wearable HAR requires a paradigmatic shift in problem formulation: instead of treating recognition as prediction over a fixed label set, we propose modeling activities as open-ended narratives expressed in natural language. Under this view, recognition becomes a problem of aligning sensor evidence with semantic descriptions with an open-vocabulary : given a segment of sensor data, the goal is to identify or generate a natural-language description that best captures its semantic content. Recent work has begun to integrate language models into wearable HAR, suggesting language as a promising semantic interface for activity understanding. However, these approaches largely retain the prevailing closed-set formulation, deriving language from predefined labels and evaluating on fixed-window, standardized-placement benchmarks, leaving open-ended semantics, variable-duration behavior, and systematic placement variability unaddressed. Truly adopting the open-vocabulary perspective requires: (1) datasets that capture unscripted, open-ended behavior rather than predefined activity lists; (2) evaluation metrics that remain meaningful without fixed classes; and (3) learning architectures capable of producing or retrieving natural-language descriptions from hetero-geneous, variable-length sensor streams. These requirements are fundamentally incompatible with prevailing wearable HAR datasets, benchmark metrics and pipelines [1, 16, 47]. Thus, achieving this shift is not solely a modeling challenge; it requires rethinking data, evaluation, and learning architectures together. Existing wearable datasets rarely combine naturalistic, unscripted behavior, sys-tematic placement variability at scale, and situated language supervision suitable for open-vocabulary evaluation. 

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:4 • Ray et al. 

Language added post hoc to scripted datasets inherits closed-world assumptions and cannot expose failure modes related to long-tailed semantics or placement shift. A dataset that embodies these forms of variability is therefore not optional but necessary for studying open-vocabulary wearable HAR. We make the following contributions to pioneer the open-ended narrative paradigm for wearable HAR: 

• We show how wearable HAR can be reformulated around open-ended activity narratives , by aligning sensor data with natural-language descriptions of ongoing behavior, enabling activity understanding under long-tailed, personalized, and cross-participant settings, and subsuming closed-set classification as a simplified downstream task. 

• ActivityNarrated Dataset : a naturalistic data collection and narrative annotation methodology captur-ing unscripted, open-ended behavior through multi-position IMU sensing and time-aligned natural-language narrations, enabling the study of long-tailed, personalized, and overlapping activities under realistic sensing conditions without a predefined taxonomy. 

• An evaluation framework for narrative-based wearable HAR , based on sensor–language retrieval, that generalizes closed-set classification and provides meaningful metrics beyond accuracy and F1 for assessing semantic alignment under open-ended activity descriptions. 

• ActNarrator model , a language-conditioned wearable HAR architecture that supports sequence-to-text inference with open-ended narratives from variable-duration sensor streams and heterogeneous, partially observed sensor placements, aligning motion representations with natural-language activity descriptions. 

ActNarrator demonstrates substantial gains over closed-set HAR baselines, including nearly doubling Macro-F1 when classification is evaluated as a downstream task. 

2 Related Work 

Wearable HAR lies at the intersection of sensing, machine learning, and human behavior. We organize prior work to motivate why ActivityNarrated is introduced not merely as a dataset, but as an evaluation paradigm that exposes forms of variability that prevailing benchmarks cannot measure. We first review dominant modeling and evaluation templates in wearable HAR and discuss their structural limitations. We then examine major wearable HAR datasets, showing how most inherit the same closed-set and fixed-placement assumptions, which in turn constrain what can be meaningfully evaluated. Finally, we connect wearable HAR to broader shifts toward open-vocabulary and language-grounded recognition in other domains, motivating language supervision and sensor–language alignment as natural next steps for wearables. Together, these threads motivate our positioning: 

ActivityNarrated is designed to expose real-world variability in both behavior and sensor placement, and to enable evaluation beyond closed-set accuracy. 

2.1 Modeling and Evaluation Practices in Wearable HAR 

Most wearable HAR pipelines share three structural commitments. First, they represent continuous behavior using fixed-length temporal windows (often 2–10 seconds), reducing recognition to independent per-window prediction [ 1, 16 , 30 ]. Second, they assume a fixed sensing configuration, typically a canonical body placement, and treat sensor streams as exchangeable across users and deployments, despite well-documented sensitivity to wearing style and placement diversity [ 7, 8]. Third, they operate over a closed label set, training models to select from a small taxonomy defined by the dataset [ 1, 16 ]. This template offers clear practical benefits: it simplifies data collection, enables standardized metrics, and supports rapid architectural iteration. However, these same commitments systematically obscure the regimes that dominate everyday life: variable-duration behaviors, heterogeneous and missing sensor placements, and open-ended semantics that are not shared across individuals. A growing body of work has begun to relax this template, but typically along one axis at a time. To better capture temporal structure, recent methods move beyond independent window classification by learning representations   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:5

that model longer-range dependencies through self-training or self-supervision, or by explicitly detecting activity boundaries and localizing actions in continuous streams [ 4 , 17 , 18 , 47 ]. To improve deployment robustness, work on domain shift and cross-dataset generalization demonstrates substantial performance degradation under changing sensing conditions, motivating domain-invariant and generalizable pretraining objectives [ 7 , 13 , 19 , 26 ]. In parallel, several approaches explicitly address heterogeneous sensing configurations, including missing modalities and partial sensor sets, highlighting that real-world deployments rarely conform to a single canonical placement or complete sensor suite [ 20 ]. Other efforts focus on variability within activity classes, often intertwined with personal style and context, which can manifest as long-tail and imbalance effects in practice [ 22 , 44 ]. Despite these advances, evaluation commonly remains anchored to closed-set window classification under benchmark taxonomies, making it difficult to determine whether improvements reflect genuine semantic understanding or improved fitting to dataset-specific regularities. This observation motivates our choice to define an evaluation paradigm in which (i) windowing is not the default interface, (ii) placement variability is explicit, and (iii) activity semantics are expressed through language rather than a fixed label set. 

2.2 Wearable HAR Datasets 

Early influential datasets such as WISDM/ActiTracker [ 21 ], UCI HAR [ 2 ], and PAMAP2 [ 36 ] established the canonical benchmark pattern: collecting a predefined set of activities from multiple participants in controlled or semi-controlled settings, recording inertial signals from one or a small fixed set of body locations, and evaluating via fixed-window classification. These datasets enabled foundational advances and remain widely used due to their simplicity, accessibility, and well-instrumented protocols. Subsequent datasets expanded scale, sensing modalities, and realism, or introduced richer temporal structure and sensing configurations. Examples include Opportunity [ 9], which provides sensor-rich recordings of daily activities with fine-grained, compositional labels; RealWorld HAR [ 46 ], which captures simultaneous recordings across multiple body locations; and large-scale mobile locomotion and transportation datasets such as SHL [ 54 ]. More recent IMWUT datasets have further broadened scope through in-the-wild collection and multimodal sensing, including ExtraSensory [ 50 ], MM-Fit [ 42 ], and WEAR [ 3 ]. Multimodal action datasets with wearable inertial components, often paired with vision, also exist, such as UTD-MHAD [10]. Despite this diversity, most wearable HAR datasets continue to share a common set of assumptions: 

• Scripted or semi-scripted activity sets. Participants are typically asked to perform a shared list of activities, which reduces cross-person heterogeneity and suppresses the long tail of personalized behavior, even in longer recordings [2, 21, 36]. 

• Limited placement variability. A single placement or small fixed set of placements is common, so generalization is often evaluated across users given the same placement , rather than across sensing configu-rations; heterogeneity is more frequently studied via device or domain differences than systematic on-body placement variation [41]. 

• Closed vocabularies and mutually exclusive labels. Activities are defined a priori and treated as single-label classes, rendering unseen activities, compositional descriptions, and overlapping behavior out-of-scope by design [9]. These design choices are pragmatic trade-offs that enabled the field to develop. However, they also help explain why gains on benchmark datasets often fail to translate to open-world deployments. To our knowledge, no existing wearable HAR benchmark combines at scale (i) unscripted, naturalistic behavior, (ii) systematic multi-position sensing, and (iii) language supervision in a form suitable for open-vocabulary evaluation. In contrast, ActivityNarrated is explicitly designed so that the primary sources of deployment difficulty are unavoidable: participants behave naturally without a shared script, the same behaviors must be recognized across up to 15 body positions (including missing sensors), and supervision is provided in natural language to avoid   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:6 •Ray et al.

collapsing semantics into a small fixed taxonomy. This design enables evaluation that directly targets the failure modes that closed-set datasets tend to mask. 

2.3 Language-Grounded and Open-Vocabulary Recognition 

In vision and multimodal learning, a major recent shift has been toward language-supervised representation learning, in which models learn aligned embeddings for perceptual inputs and natural-language descriptions [ 33 ]. This alignment enables open-vocabulary recognition, allowing models to be queried at inference time with arbitrary text and to generalize beyond the label sets seen during training. This paradigm has been successfully extended beyond image classification to open-vocabulary detection [ 28 ], segmentation [ 60 ], and video understanding [ 56 ]. More broadly, LLM-based prompting and language supervision have made zero-shot and compositional generalization increasingly practical by shifting supervision away from fixed taxonomies and toward natural language. Wearable HAR has comparatively limited work that treats language as a first-class interface rather than an auxiliary signal. Recent efforts demonstrate the potential of sensor–language modeling for activity tracking, interaction, and feedback [ 11 , 53 ], as well as language-driven transfer and zero-shot recognition from inertial sensing [ 23 , 43 ]. Despite this progress, most evaluations are still conducted on repurposed closed-set datasets with fixed windowing and standardized sensor placements. Language supervision is often derived from activity class names or templated descriptions, inheriting the same semantic constraints. As a result, these approaches do not directly confront the combined challenge of open-ended semantics, variable-length behavior, and systematic placement variability in naturalistic settings. This motivates our framing of wearable HAR as sequence-to-text 

modeling, and our use of sensor–language alignment as an evaluation target rather than a purely architectural choice. 

2.4 Use of Language Models for Wearable HAR 

In HAR the diversity and continuity of activities in real-world settings far exceed the closed set of predefined classes typically available in annotated datasets. As highlighted by McCarthy et al. [ 25 ], most HAR systems are trained and evaluated under a closed-world assumption, forcing continuous and often novel activities into a limited taxonomy of known labels, which limits robustness in real-world deployments. Recent works in the community focusing on integrating LLMs into IMU-based HAR has begun to address this challenge by leveraging language for semantic abstraction, generalization, and interaction. Sensor2Text [ 11 ] and UbiPhysio [ 53 ] align wearable sensor signals with natural-language descriptions to enable querying, summarization, and feedback, but operate on pre-segmented sensor windows derived from existing labeled datasets. At the modeling level, One Model to Fit Them All [ 55 ], IMUZero [43 ], and LLM-guided Semantic Alignment for HAR [57 ] use LLM-assisted semantic representations to improve cross-dataset generalization or enable zero-shot recognition; however, they likewise adopt fixed-length window inputs and repurpose standard HAR benchmarks with predefined activity classes. Despite introducing language-based reasoning and semantic alignment, these approaches continue to frame HAR as a closed-set classification problem, rather than addressing continuous, point-to-point temporal annotation, activity boundary localization, or open-ended activity discovery in untrimmed IMU streams. 

Connecting the Threads. Taken together, prior work reveals a consistent pattern: while wearable HAR has developed increasingly strong modeling tools, progress remains anchored to a paradigm that rewards performance under restrictive templates. Fixed temporal windows, standardized sensor placements, and most critically closed-set activity vocabularies continue to dominate both datasets and benchmarks. The dominant paradigm abstracts away open-ended semantics, cross-person heterogeneity, and heterogeneous or missing sensor configurations, which not only limits what can be evaluated but also constrains what models are encouraged to learn. As a result, existing benchmarks systematically discourage the development of truly adaptive representations and learning   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:7

methods required for open-ended activity understanding in realistic deployment settings, making it difficult to assess whether a model captures activity meaning or merely exploits benchmark-specific regularities. 

ActivityNarrated is designed to address this gap by unifying (i) naturalistic unscripted behavior, (ii) dense multi-position sensing at scale, and (iii) language supervision via time-aligned narrations paired with expert annotations. By redefining the objective , evaluation signal , and dataset requirements for wearable HAR, this framework makes open-world variability unavoidable rather than incidental. This combination enables task formulations and evaluation metrics that directly test open-vocabulary generalization, compositional reasoning, and robust activity understanding under realistic sensing conditions. The language-conditioned ActNarrator model presented in this work serves as a concrete instantiation of this paradigm, demonstrating how these principles can be realized in practice, rather than constituting the defining contribution itself. 

3 ActivityNarrated Dataset 

Our proposed open-vocabulary paradigm demands a fundamentally different type of dataset foundation, one that embodies the problem formulation rather than abstracting away its core challenges. This section introduces 

ActivityNarrated , a naturalistic wearable activity dataset designed to capture unscripted, open-ended behavior under realistic sensing conditions. The dataset is collected in an unscripted, multi-hotspot environment, combining multi-position IMU sensing with multi-view video and time-aligned participant narrations. We detail the study design, sensing hardware, experimental space, annotation pipeline, and dataset statistics. 

3.1 Protocol-Level Formulation 

To facilitate reproducibility and community extension, we first describe a general protocol for open-vocabulary wearable activity datasets. Conventional wearable HAR datasets are typically constructed under a closed-set paradigm. Participants are instructed to repeatedly perform a predefined list of activities, often following scripted protocols that control execution order, duration, and sensor placement. Activities are treated as discrete, mutually exclusive classes, and annotation consists of assigning numeric label indices from a fixed taxonomy to fixed-length or manually segmented time windows. This formulation simplifies data collection and evaluation, but it implicitly assumes that activity semantics are known in advance and can be exhaustively enumerated. In contrast, the open-vocabulary paradigm adopted in this work is grounded in a fundamentally different experimental abstraction. 

Naturalistic Recording Protocol. Rather than instructing participants to repeat a predefined activity list, we provide an environment rich in objects, tools, and spatial affordances, and allow participants to act freely according to their own intentions. Activities are not prescribed, segmented, or temporally constrained; instead, they emerge organically from interaction with the environment and may overlap, vary in duration, or be composed of multiple concurrent actions. Data collection should follow unscripted ad-hoc behavior protocols: 

• Participants perform free-form daily activities or task sequences. A content-rich environment can be provided to encourage activity variety. 

• Data are collected continuously, without imposing fixed window lengths. Segmentation for evaluation or training can be derived post hoc, reflecting real-world variability. 

Narrative Annotation Guidelines. Under the open-vocabulary paradigm, annotation requires observers to describe what participants are doing using natural language, without reliance on a predefined vocabulary or template. These narrative descriptions are time-aligned but not restricted to fixed windows or mutually exclusive labels, allowing multiple valid descriptions to apply to the same segment. As a result, the dataset captures activity   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:8 •Ray et al.

semantics as they are expressed in practice, rather than forcing them into a predefined taxonomy. Annotations can be collected in two complementary forms: 

• A single expert annotating all activities post-data collection using standard terms as both natural language and discrete classes. 

• Free-form natural language descriptions of actions and context done by the participant while performing the actions. 

• There must be timestamps alignment between sensor segments and corresponding annotations. 

Evaluation Splits. The protocol defines standardized splits for generalization and to avoid overfitting from data leakage: 

• Cross-subject (XS): train/test participants are disjoint (leave-person-out). 

• Cross-position (XSP): held-out participant and sensor positions at test time (leave-person-and-sensor-out). 

• Missing-sensor (MS): evaluate robustness to partial sensor sets only during inference. 

3.2 Data collection 

3.2.1 Study Design and Ethics. We recruited 22 participants (age 21–33, 9 female, 13 male, height 155–185 cm, weight 52–89 kg) from university and community postings. Inclusion criteria were: (i) age 18+, (ii) ability to wear all IMU devices simultaneously, and (iii) capacity to provide informed consent in English. The study was approved by our institutional ethics committee. Participants provided written informed consent for (i) wearable sensing, (ii) video recording, and (iii) dataset release under a tiered-access model. Consent procedures emphasized modularity, allowing participants to opt out of specific modalities. Each participant completed a single recording session of approximately one hour. Sessions were designed to encourage naturalistic behavior with minimal instruction: participants were asked to wear sensors, move freely within the experimental space, and perform activities of their choosing, without following a prescribed script. This design supports the collection of unscripted, heterogeneous, and potentially concurrent behaviors. 

3.2.2 Experimental Space and Activity Hotspots. Recording sessions took place in a room-scale experimental space (8-by-7 meters) containing seven predefined activity hotspots , each designed to afford a set of everyday behaviors without prescribing a fixed sequence of actions. Hotspots encourage natural context switches, multitasking, and movement between areas, while allowing participants to act freely. An open/transition area connects hotspots to support locomotion and cross-context transitions (see Fig. 3). Hotspots are affordance-driven rather than scripted: participants may ignore, revisit, or multitask across hotspots. This setup captures realistic transitions, interruptions, and concurrent behaviors while maintaining reliable observational coverage, enabling a dataset that reflects the variability and compositionality of real-world activity. Two fixed cameras were positioned on opposite sides of the room to capture all hotspots with complementary viewpoints (Fig. 3). This coverage reduces occlusion and supports post-hoc annotation, synchronization of spoken narrations with sensor data, and optional vision-language model labeling. 

3.2.3 Hardware and Instrumentation. We designed a simple, reproducible wearable motion sensing platform using off-the-shelf components. Each unit comprises: 

• Controller: Adafruit QT Py ESP32-S2 (WiFi-enabled, 650 mAh Li-ion battery) 

• Sensor: Adafruit BNO085 9-axis IMU (3-axis acceleration, 3-axis linear acceleration, 3-axis gyroscope) Data are streamed via UDP over WiFi to a laptop, timestamped on receipt with millisecond resolution, and stored for synchronization with video and narration streams.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:9

Fig. 3. Room-scale layout with seven activity hotspots and two fixed camera viewpoints covering the full environment. 

Fig. 4. IMU data collection device design. IMU on body Layout 

Although BNO085 supports higher rates, the multi-sensor setup achieved an average end-to-end sampling frequency of ∼30 Hz per device. Accelerometer range is configurable up to ±16 𝑔 ; gyroscope up to ±2000 ◦/s. Timestamps ensure temporal alignment across sensors; explicit sync events (jumping jacks) further refine alignment with video and audio. To capture placement variability, participants wore up to 15 IMUs across torso and limbs (Fig. 4). Sensors were mounted securely to minimize detachment, while enabling natural movement. Sessions were recorded with two iPhone 15 Pro cameras mounted on tripods on opposite sides of the room, capturing 1920 ×1080 resolution at 30 fps. Video coverage spans all hotspots, enabling: 

• Post-hoc expert annotation 

• Synchronization with narrations and IMU data 

• Frame-level vision-language model (VLM) labeling   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:10 •Ray et al.

The platform balances reproducibility, minimal participant burden, and high-fidelity sensing. Open, documented hardware and placement support cross-position generalization studies, while multi-view video ensures robust alignment and annotation without limiting IMU-first analyses. 

3.2.4 Synchronization and Data Integrity. All IMU packets are timestamped on the laptop receiver using a single system clock, providing a unified timebase across devices. Video and audio streams from the two cameras are recorded on the same devices, ensuring native synchronization. To align video streams to each other, we perform audio waveform matching using cross-correlation (implemented via Syncaila [45]). IMU and video/audio streams are aligned using a simple, salient synchronization routine: participants perform five jumping jacks at the start and end of each session. The motion is clearly visible in video and generates distinct peaks in IMU signals. These events are used to crop sessions to a common interval and apply lightweight piecewise-linear correction if minor drift occurs over time. Audio and video recordings are complete for all sessions. IMU streams exhibit ∼7% missing or corrupted samples due to sensor detachment, power loss, or temporary connectivity issues. Missing values are explicitly marked as NaNs in (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 ) channels, with corresponding masks per device and timestep, instead of being interpolated, preserving the true nature of sensor reliability for modeling and evaluation. 

3.2.5 Annotation and Supervision Sources. ActivityNarrated provides three complementary sources of supervision, capturing multiple semantic levels and supporting both open-vocabulary and standardized evaluation: 

1. Expert Annotations. An expert annotator reviewed IMU streams alongside synchronized two-view video and participant narrations. Annotations focus on low-level body actions (e.g., posture, locomotion, reaching, lifting) while minimizing incidental context. 

• Soft labels: Natural-language descriptions of observed movements, refined via LLM-based normalization to collapse semantically equivalent phrases (e.g., “walk forward” vs. “take a step forward”). After normalization, the dataset contains 3,000+ unique low-action descriptions. 

• Hard labels: To support closed-set evaluation, soft labels are mapped to a 23-class movement-centric taxonomy (22 canonical actions + 1 Other class). Not all classes appear for every participant due to unscripted behavior, naturally inducing cross-subject sparsity and long-tail distributions. 

2. Vision–Language Model (VLM) Derived Labels. We provide auxiliary weak supervision from video using an open-source VLM (Video LLaMA 3 [61]): 

• Two camera views are merged side-by-side to provide complementary perspectives. 

• Frames are sampled at 1 Hz, generating short, activity-focused natural-language descriptions. 

• Consecutive frames with identical or semantically similar descriptions (via cosine similarity of embeddings) are merged into intervals, producing contiguous weak labels. These labels support auxiliary analyses and model ablations but are not treated as ground truth. 

3. Participant’s Self Narrations. Participants provide free-form spoken descriptions of their activities: 

• Narrations are transcribed with Whisper XL [31], yielding text and timestamps. 

• Segments are aligned to IMU streams via synchronization events and refined by experts if needed. 

• Narrations reflect higher-level, goal-oriented behavior, often describing multi-step, concurrent, or com-positional activities. After normalization, the narration corpus contains 1,000+ unique open-vocabulary activity descriptions. These three supervision sources provide flexible training and evaluation options: 

• Open-vocabulary sequence-to-text models can use participant narrations or expert soft labels. 

• Classical windowed HAR models can leverage hard labels for comparability with existing benchmarks.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:11

This multi-source structure allows ActivityNarrated to simultaneously support research on personalized, naturalistic behavior and standardized benchmarking under controlled taxonomies. 

3.2.6 Dataset Scale and Summary Statistics. ActivityNarrated consists of 22 continuous recording sessions collected under the protocol described in Secs. 3.2.1–3.2.5. Data are captured as uninterrupted multi-sensor streams with variable-duration segments defined by narration boundaries, VLM-derived intervals, and expert review. Across all sessions, the dataset contains approximately 22 hours of synchronized IMU, video, and audio data. Each session includes measurements from up to 15 on-body IMU locations (Fig. 4), sampled at an average effective rate of ∼30 Hz per device. IMU streams include explicit missingness masks, with ∼7% of samples marked as missing due to real-world sensing issues such as detachment or connectivity loss. Supervision is provided at multiple semantic and granularity levels (Sec. 3.2.5). In aggregate, the dataset includes: 

• 1,000+ unique open-vocabulary activity descriptions from participant narrations, 

• 3,000+ unique expert-authored natural-language descriptions aligned to low-level body actions, 

• 23 discrete class based on movement-centric taxonomy for closed-set evaluation, and 

• 10,000+ weakly labeled intervals derived from vision–language models. Because annotations are aligned to continuous streams rather than imposed windows, segment durations vary widely and naturally capture transitions, interruptions, and overlapping behaviors. This structure supports evaluation under both open-vocabulary and closed-set paradigms without assuming fixed temporal scales. Tables 1 position ActivityNarrated relative to prior IMU-based HAR benchmarks. Because behavior is recorded as continuous streams with minimal scripting, the dataset contains frequent transitions, interruptions, and concurrent actions. Segment durations are variable (defined by narration, VLM boundaries and expert review), enabling evaluation beyond fixed-window assumptions. 

4 Benchmark Metrics for Open-Vocabulary Evaluation 

Open-vocabulary wearable understanding presents unique evaluation challenges: there are no fixed classes, natural-language descriptions are diverse and often paraphrased, and sensor segments can vary widely. To assess model performance comprehensively, we adopt a multi-axis benchmarking strategy: (1) Representation metrics: measure the fidelity and stability of learned token sequences that underlie cross-modal alignment. (2) Retrieval metrics: quantify semantic alignment between IMU segments and natural-language descriptions. (3) Classification metrics: allow limited comparison with standard HAR pipelines using fixed taxonomies. 

4.1 Representation Metrics. 

Open-vocabulary alignment depends on high-quality discrete representations of sensor signals. We evaluate tokenization using: 

• Time-domain ℓ1 reconstruction error: how closely the tokens can reconstruct the original signal. 

• Spectral ℓ1 reconstruction error: fidelity in the frequency domain. 

• Token divergence (JS): Measures the invariance of the learned token distribution across different subjects or sensor positions. Let 𝑃 and 𝑄 be token distributions (histograms) for two conditions. Then the Jensen-Shannon divergence is: JS (𝑃 || 𝑄 ) = 12 KL (𝑃 || 𝑀 ) + 12 KL (𝑄 || 𝑀 ), 𝑀 = 12 (𝑃 + 𝑄 ), (1)   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:12 •Ray et al.

Table 1. Comparison to representative IMU-based wearable HAR datasets along axes emphasized by ActivityNarrated .Positions counts distinct on-body locations recorded. Label format indicates whether supervision is provided as Classes ,

natural language , or both . Semantic activity level indicates whether annotations primarily capture higher-level activities , low actions/gestures , or both .                                                                                            

> Dataset Positions Subjects Label format Semantic activity level
> WISDM [21] 136 Classes (6) High-level UCI HAR [2] 130 Classes (6) High-level PAMAP2 [36] 39Classes (24) High-level Opportunity [9] 74Classes (35) Both low and high-level RealWorld HAR [46] 615 Classes (7) High-level SHL [54] 13Classes (8) High-level ExtraSensory [50] 160 Classes(51) High-level MM-Fit (IMWUT) [42] 520 Classes (10) High-level WEAR [3] 122 Classes (18) high-level UTD-MHAD [10] 28Classes (27) High-level HAR70+ [49] 118 Classes (8) High-level MotionSense [24] 124 Classes (6) High-level UniMiB SHAR [27] 130 Classes (17) High-level UMAFall [5] 117 Classes (11) High-level MobiAct [52] 157 Classes (13) High-level Shoaib et al. [38] 110 Classes (13) High-level HAPT [37] 130 Classes (6) High-level KU-HAR [39] 190 Classes (18) High-level HAR Sense (HARSense) [12] 112 Classes (6) High-level TNDA-HAR [58] 123 Classes (8) High-level CAPTURE-24 [6] 1151 Classes (200) High-level
> ActivityNarrated (ours) 15 22 Both (3110 unique NL / 23 classes) Both low and high-level

where KL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Lower JS indicates more stable and invariant token representations. 

4.2 Retrieval Metrics 

In open-vocabulary evaluation, standard classification metrics (Accuracy, F1) provide only a partial view of model performance because multiple textual descriptions can correctly describe the same sensor segment. Retrieval metrics directly evaluate the model’s ability to match IMU segments to relevant natural-language descriptions. 

Recall (R@K): In open-vocabulary wearable understanding, a single sensor segment may correspond to multiple semantically valid descriptions, and users typically inspect only the top few retrievals. R@K evaluates whether the model retrieves any correct description within the top-𝐾 candidates: R@K = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

1{𝑡 𝑖 ∈ top-𝐾 retrieved candidates for 𝑥 𝑖 }. (2) High R@K indicates that the model reliably surfaces semantically relevant descriptions despite paraphrasing or variability in expression, which is crucial for usability in real-world scenarios where users cannot scan the entire result set. 

Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR): Even if a correct description appears in the top-𝐾 , it is most useful if it appears near the top. MRR captures how effectively the model ranks the most semantically accurate description   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:13

first: MRR = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

1

rank 𝑖 

, (3) where rank 𝑖 is the position of the first correct description for query 𝑖 . In open-vocabulary tasks, early ranking is especially important because the space of possible descriptions is vast and long-tailed. A high MRR ensures that the model not only retrieves correct candidates but also makes them immediately accessible, reflecting strong semantic alignment between sensor signals and language. 

Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG@K): Many queries have multiple valid descriptions (paraphrases, different granularities). nDCG@K rewards retrieval of highly relevant descriptions while penalizing lower-ranked or partially correct matches: DCG@K =

> 𝐾

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

2rel 𝑖 − 1log 2 (𝑖 + 1) , nDCG@K = DCG@K IDCG@K , (4) where rel 𝑖 encodes relevance. This metric captures both ranking quality and paraphrase tolerance, which are crucial in open-vocabulary settings. 

4.3 Hybrid Benchmarking: Classification and Discretization Metrics 

Classification Metrics. Contemporary metrics such as Accuracy and Macro-F1 rely on fixed class labels and thus provide only a partial view of open-vocabulary model performance. They cannot capture the full semantic alignment between sensor segments and diverse textual descriptions. However, for comparability with standard HAR pipelines, we map retrieved natural-language descriptions to a 23-class taxonomy (22 actions + other )using a simple LLM query. We then report: 

• Accuracy: fraction of segments correctly classified into the fixed taxonomy. 

• Macro-F1: class-balanced harmonic mean of precision and recall, mitigating the effect of dominant classes. 

Summary. This three-axis benchmarking framework ensures a comprehensive evaluation: 

• Discretization metrics quantify representation fidelity and invariance that support robust cross-modal alignment. 

• Retrieval metrics capture semantic alignment, ranking quality, and paraphrase tolerance. 

• Classification metrics provide a partial, comparable measure against conventional HAR pipelines. 

5 ActNarrator Architecture for Open-End Sensor-Language Alignment 

We treat wearable HAR as language generation grounded in sensor evidence rather than fixed-class classification. Given one or more IMU streams, the model generates natural-language descriptions capable of expressing unseen, compositional, and concurrent activities. This open-vocabulary formulation leverages pre-trained language models (LLMs) for semantic generalization and paraphrase handling. IMU streams, however, are high-frequency continuous signals, while LLMs operate on discrete token sequences. To bridge this gap, our framework, ActNarrator , consists of two stages: (1) Sensor Signal Discretization: Continuous multi-channel IMU segments are encoded into sequences of discrete sensor tokens using a spectral VQ-VAE. These tokens form a motion lexicon, capturing reusable micro-action primitives robust to variations in amplitude, timing, and placement. (2) Sensor-Language Generative Inference: A Q-Former adapts token sequences (including variable-length segments and heterogeneous sensor subsets) to the embedding space of a frozen LLM, which generates open-vocabulary activity descriptions. Structured metadata (sensor positions and segment duration) is provided via a textual header.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:14 •Ray et al.

This design supports variable-length sequences, arbitrary sensor subsets (including missing sensors), and multi-scale, compositional outputs, aligning closely with the challenges highlighted by the ActivityNarrated 

dataset. 

5.1 Discretization via Spectral VQ-VAE 

IMU streams are continuous, high-frequency signals, while LLMs operate on discrete token sequences. To bridge this gap, we learn a discrete sensor token representation using a vector-quantized autoencoder (VQ-VAE) augmented with multi-view spectral encoding. 

Segmenting IMU streams. Each IMU stream is divided into short, overlapping temporal chunks of fixed duration 

Δ𝑡 . For a segment 𝑥 ∈ R𝑇 ×𝐶 with 𝑇 samples and 𝐶 channels, we produce 𝑀 chunks {𝑥 (𝑚 ) }𝑀 𝑚 =1. Each chunk is mapped to one discrete codebook entry 𝑧 𝑚 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝐾 }, yielding a token sequence {𝑧 𝑚 }𝑀 𝑚 =1 representing the segment. 

Multi-view spectral encoding. To capture both transient and periodic motion, each chunk is processed in three views: 

• Time domain: raw IMU signals. 

• Frequency domain: short-time Fourier transform (STFT). 

• Wavelet domain: continuous wavelet transform coefficients. Each view is encoded using a lightweight convolutional encoder (1D for time, 2D for STFT and wavelets), producing temporally aligned latent sequences. The three embeddings are fused (concatenation + linear projection) to form 

ℎ𝑚 ∈ R𝑑 , which is then quantized using a shared codebook 𝐸 = {𝑒 𝑘 }𝐾 𝑘 =1:

𝑧 𝑚 = arg min  

> 𝑘

∥ℎ𝑚 − 𝑒 𝑘 ∥2, 𝑞 𝑚 = 𝑒 𝑧 𝑚 . (5) 

Decoder and reconstruction. A single decoder reconstructs the time-domain signal from the quantized embed-dings {𝑞 𝑚 }, optionally predicting STFT and wavelet representations. The model is trained with: 

Ltokenizer = Ltime + 𝜆 stft Lstft + 𝜆 wav Lwav + L vq + L commit , (6) where Ltime = |𝑥 − ˆ𝑥 |1, Lstft = |STFT (𝑥 ) − STFT ( ˆ𝑥 )| 1, Lwav = |Wav (𝑥 ) − Wav ( ˆ𝑥 )| 1, Lvq = |sg [ℎ] − 𝑒 |22,and Lcommit = 𝛽 |ℎ − sg [𝑒 ]| 22. Here, sg [·] denotes the stop-gradient operator. 

Benefits of spectral tokenization. Multi-view encoding encourages the codebook to capture micro-action primi-tives that are robust to amplitude and temporal variations while preserving sensitivity to short, salient events. This yields discrete tokens that generalize across participants, placements, and motion variations, forming a reusable interface for language-conditioned generation. 

5.2 Generation via Sensor-to-LLM Alignment 

After tokenization, each IMU position 𝑝 produces a discrete token sequence 𝑧 (𝑝 ) . The goal is to map an arbitrary subset of positions {𝑧 (𝑝 ) }𝑝 ∈ P and variable-length segments into open-vocabulary natural-language descriptions. Our architecture uses a lightweight Q-Former to interface between sensor tokens and a frozen LLM. 

Q-Former for multi-sensor fusion. Each token index is embedded into a continuous vector. Token sequences from all available positions are concatenated and fed into a cross-attention module (Q-Former) with a fixed set of learnable queries. The output is a fixed number of sensor prompt vectors in the LLM embedding space, summarizing variable-length, multi-position motion evidence. 

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024.

ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding • 1:15 CWT  

> STFT
> IMU Codebook (Token Space)
> V0
> V1
> V2
> V...
> Vn
> Vector
> Quantizer

+ Time  

> Decoder
> CWT
> STFT
> Raw IMU Segments + Feature Expansion Raw IMU Reconstruction

Ltime , Lstft , Lwav 

Lcodebook , Lcommitment 

> STFT
> Encoder
> Wavelet
> Encoder
> Time
> Encoder

Fig. 5. Spectral VQ-VAE for IMU tokenization. IMU streams are split into chunks and processed in three views (time, STFT, wavelet). Three encoders produce latent embeddings that are fused and quantized via a shared codebook. The decoder reconstructs the time-domain signal and optionally spectral targets. 

Conditioning on position and duration. To make placement and segment length explicit, we prepend a textual header to the LLM input. For example: 

Describe what the person is doing where input IMU from {pos_1} is active for 𝑡 1 seconds with {IMU_Tokens_1}, {pos_2} for 𝑡 2 seconds with {IMU_Tokens_2}, ... 

This allows the model to reason about how identical motion primitives manifest differently across body locations and over different time scales, supporting missing or heterogeneous sensors without retraining. 

Training objective. Given the sensor prompts and metadata header, the frozen LLM is trained via standard next-token prediction: 

LLM = −

> 𝑀

∑︁  

> 𝑡 =1

log 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑦 𝑡 | 𝑦 <𝑡 , header , sensor_prompts ), (7) where 𝑦 = (𝑦 1, . . . , 𝑦 𝑀 ) is the target description, and 𝜃 includes only the Q-Former and projection layers. The LLM remains frozen, leveraging its language prior for open-vocabulary generation. 

Handling variable-length, heterogeneous sensors. Token sequences vary with segment duration, and available positions may differ across examples. The Q-Former compresses these sequences into fixed-size sensor prompts, enabling the LLM to generate compositional and concurrent descriptions (e.g., “walking while gesturing”) regardless of which sensors are present or the segment length. 

Training schedule. We first pretrain the Spectral VQ-VAE to obtain stable tokenization, then train the Q-Former and projection layers to align sensor tokens to the frozen LLM. 

6 Evaluation Results 

This section evaluates ActNarrator in three stages. First, we assess the quality of the learned IMU discretization 

produced by the Spectral VQ-VAE, verifying that the discrete sensor tokens preserve motion information while capturing reusable micro-activity structure. Second, we evaluate open-vocabulary wearable understanding via 

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:16 • Ray et al. Position 1 Position 2 Position n  ..….                                                   

> V6V3V215 Vx
> V6V13 V13 V21 Vx
> V21 V3Vx
> Position 1 Position 2 Position  n
> ……….
> Snseconds
> What activity the person is doing ,if the imu signal at [Position 1]
> [to be filled with IMU 1 Query tokens ]of length [S 1], ……., at
> [Position n] [ to be filled with IMU nQueries tokens ]of length of
> [Sn]seconds looks like this ?
> Text Encoding
> Large
> Language
> Model
> The person is jumping five times while
> swinging arms .

+     

> Query
> Former
> He jumps five time in a sequence .

LLM   

> Time
> Encoder
> ……….
> S1seconds
> S2seconds

Fig. 6. Sensor-to-LLM generation. Token sequences from an arbitrary subset of IMU positions are embedded and fused via a Q-Former into fixed-size sensor prompts. A textual header specifies positions and duration. A frozen LLM generates open-vocabulary activity descriptions conditioned on both prompts and header. 

sensor–language retrieval , where models must align variable-length, multi-position IMU segments to free-form natural-language descriptions. Third, we report closed-set activity recognition results under a standard 23-class expert taxonomy, not as a complete measure of activity understanding, but as a diagnostic to contextualize performance relative to classical wearable HAR pipelines. Across all settings, we emphasize deployment-relevant generalization, including cross-subject, cross-position, and missing-sensor robustness. 

6.1 Training Configuration 

Optimization and training setup. All models are trained with the Adam optimizer using a learning rate of 

1 × 10 −3, weight decay 1 × 10 −4, and batch size 64. Early stopping with a patience of 10 epochs is applied based on task-specific validation metrics (Sec. 6.3, Sec. 6.4). Training runs for up to 300 epochs, and the final model is selected according to the best validation performance. Experiments are conducted on a Linux system equipped with an NVIDIA A6000 GPU, AMD Ryzen 9 CPU, and PyTorch with CUDA support. All experiments are run 5 times under Leave-one-out Cross Validation (LOOCV) to get 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 ± 𝑠𝑡𝑑 for all evaluations. 

Language model backbones. To study the effect of model scale and backbone choice, we evaluate multiple pretrained LLMs from HuggingFace: 

• Qwen 2.5 [59]: 1.5B, 3B, and 7B parameter variants. 

• Gemma [48]: 2B parameter variant. 

• LLaMA 3.3 [15]: 8B parameter variant. All LLM parameters are kept frozen during training. Only the Q-Former and the sensor-token projection layers are optimized. 

6.2 IMU Discretization 

Before evaluating sensor–language alignment or downstream recognition, we first analyze the IMU discretization module in isolation. The objective is to determine whether the tokenizer learns reusable, placement-invariant 

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding • 1:17 

Table 2. Ablation over dictionary size 𝐾 . Moderate dictionaries ( 𝐾 = 128 ) balance reconstruction fidelity and token reuse across subjects and positions. 

𝐾 Time ℓ1 ↓ Spectral ℓ1 ↓ JS ↓

XS XSP XS XSP XS XSP 32 0.118 ± 0.006 0.132 ± 0.008 0.164 ± 0.009 0.181 ± 0.011 0.41 ± 0.03 0.47 ± 0.04 64 0.097 ± 0.005 0.111 ± 0.007 0.138 ± 0.007 0.155 ± 0.009 0.31 ± 0.02 0.36 ± 0.03 

128 0.082 ± 0.004 0.095 ± 0.006 0.116 ± 0.006 0.131 ± 0.008 0.22 ± 0.02 0.27 ± 0.02 

256 0.079 ± 0.004 0.092 ± 0.006 0.113 ± 0.006 0.129 ± 0.007 0.29 ± 0.03 0.35 ± 0.03 512 0.076 ± 0.003 0.090 ± 0.005 0.111 ± 0.005 0.127 ± 0.007 0.38 ± 0.04 0.44 ± 0.04 

Table 3. Ablation over discretization window length Δ𝑡 . Intermediate durations (2 s) yield the best trade-off between reconstruction quality and compositional token structure. 

Δ𝑡 (s) Time ℓ1 ↓ Spectral ℓ1 ↓ JS ↓

XS XSP XS XSP XS XSP 1.0 0.091 ± 0.005 0.105 ± 0.007 0.128 ± 0.007 0.145 ± 0.009 0.29 ± 0.03 0.34 ± 0.03 

2.0 0.082 ± 0.004 0.095 ± 0.006 0.116 ± 0.006 0.131 ± 0.008 0.22 ± 0.02 0.27 ± 0.02 

3.0 0.087 ± 0.005 0.101 ± 0.007 0.123 ± 0.007 0.139 ± 0.009 0.31 ± 0.03 0.37 ± 0.03 5.0 0.104 ± 0.006 0.121 ± 0.009 0.149 ± 0.009 0.168 ± 0.011 0.42 ± 0.04 0.48 ± 0.05 

Fig. 7. Micro-activity decomposition via IMU tokenization: Similar activities yield recurring token patterns that repeat over time, illustrating how extended behaviors are composed of shared motion primitives. 

motion primitives that generalize across subjects and sensor locations, while preserving both time-domain fidelity and frequency-domain structure characteristic of human motion. 

Task definition. Given a continuous IMU segment 𝑥 , the tokenizer encodes it into a sequence of discrete tokens 

𝑧 1: 𝑇 , which are then decoded to reconstruct the signal ˆ𝑥 . No language supervision is used in this stage. Evaluation focuses on (i) reconstruction quality in the time and spectral domains, and (ii) the statistical structure of token usage across subjects and sensor placements. 

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:18 • Ray et al.                                                                                      

> Table 4. Comparison of IMU discretization strategies under XS and XSP evaluation. Spectral VQ-VAE achieves the lowest time-domain and spectral reconstruction error, as well as the strongest token reuse, indicating improved fidelity and invariance.
> Tokenizer Time ℓ1↓Spectral ℓ1↓JS ↓
> XS XSP XS XSP XS XSP Raw VQ-VAE 0.332 ±0.018 0.381 ±0.022 0.471 ±0.026 0.512 ±0.029 0.54 ±0.04 0.59 ±0.03 STFT VQ-VAE 0.148 ±0.010 0.169 ±0.012 0.213 ±0.014 0.241 ±0.016 0.46 ±0.05 0.51 ±0.05 Wavelet VQ-VAE 0.156 ±0.011 0.178 ±0.013 0.198 ±0.013 0.226 ±0.015 0.39 ±0.05 0.44 ±0.05
> Spectral VQ-VAE 0.082 ±0.004 0.095 ±0.006 0.116 ±0.006 0.131 ±0.008 0.21 ±0.02 0.24 ±0.02

Evaluation protocol and data splits. We evaluate discretization under deployment-relevant generalization settings using both cross-subject (XS) and cross-position (XP) splits. These splits explicitly test whether the learned codebook captures intrinsic motion structure rather than overfitting to subject-specific kinematics or placement-dependent signal artifacts. 

Ablation dimensions. We study two design choices that directly affect the expressivity and compositionality of the discrete representation: Dictionary size ( 𝐾 ): The codebook size controls the granularity of motion primitives. Small dictionaries risk collapsing distinct motions into shared tokens, while overly large dictionaries may memorize subject- or placement-specific patterns, reducing token reuse under XS and XSP evaluation. Input window length ( Δ𝑡 ): Continuous IMU streams are discretized into fixed-length windows. Short win-dows increase temporal resolution but fragment coherent motion primitives, whereas long windows improve reconstruction locally but reduce compositional flexibility by blurring transitions between motions. Unless otherwise stated, all ablations use the full Spectral VQ-VAE encoder (time-domain, STFT, and wavelet views), with all other hyperparameters fixed. 

Effect of dictionary size. Table 2 reports reconstruction error and token divergence for varying codebook sizes. Increasing 𝐾 consistently improves reconstruction accuracy, with time-domain ℓ1 error under XS decreasing from 0.118 at 𝐾 =32 to 0.076 at 𝐾 =512 . However, this improvement comes at the cost of reduced token invariance: JS divergence under XSP decreases from 0.47 at 𝐾 =32 to a minimum of 0.27 at 𝐾 =128 , before increasing again to 

0.44 at 𝐾 =512 .A moderate dictionary size ( 𝐾 =128 ) achieves the best trade-off, combining low reconstruction error (XS time 

ℓ1 = 0.082 ; XSP spectral ℓ1 = 0.131 ) with the strongest cross-subject and cross-position token reuse (JS = 0.22 XS, 

0.27 XP). We therefore adopt 𝐾 =128 in all subsequent experiments. 

Effect of input window length. Table 3 evaluates discretization performance for window lengths ranging from 1 s to 5 s. Very short windows (1 s) yield reasonable reconstruction but higher token divergence (XP JS = 0.34 ), indicating fragmented and less reusable primitives. Conversely, long windows (5 s) significantly degrade both reconstruction (XP time ℓ1 = 0.121 ) and invariance (XP JS = 0.48 ), suggesting that extended segments blur multiple motion phases into single tokens. An intermediate window length of 2 s consistently outperforms alternatives, achieving the lowest reconstruction error (XS time ℓ1 = 0.082 , XSP spectral ℓ1 = 0.131 ) and lowest token divergence (JS = 0.22 XS, 0.27 XP). This setting preserves coherent motion structure while maintaining compositional token sequences. 

Micro-activity structure analysis. Token sequences generated for long activity recordings exhibit clear micro-activity decomposition. Extended behaviors are expressed as recurring token patterns that repeat over time and remain consistent across subjects (Fig. 7). This recurrence aligns with the low JS divergence observed under XS and XSP splits and demonstrates that the tokenizer captures reusable motion primitives rather than instance-specific   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:19

Table 5. Open-vocabulary sensor–language retrieval on narration-grounded activity descriptions under XS) and cross-position (XP) splits. Results compare state-of-the-art open-vocabulary baselines with ablations of the proposed model, highlighting the impact of discretization and language grounding.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

> XS XP Method R@1 ↑R@5 ↑MRR ↑nDCG@5 ↑R@1 ↑R@5 ↑MRR ↑nDCG@5 ↑
> IMU2CLIP 10.4 ±0.6 32.7 ±1.4 0.21 ±0.02 0.33 ±0.03 8.9 ±0.5 29.5 ±1.3 0.19 ±0.02 0.30 ±0.02 OVHAR 21.9 ±0.8 47.6 ±1.6 0.35 ±0.03 0.49 ±0.02 19.3 ±0.7 44.2 ±1.5 0.32 ±0.02 0.46 ±0.03 PaLM-E 23.1 ±0.5 50.4 ±1.7 0.38 ±0.03 0.50 ±0.02 20.9 ±0.4 44.2 ±1.5 0.36 ±0.03 0.47 ±0.02 Raw + mean pooling 22.8 ±0.7 49.3 ±1.5 0.36 ±0.02 0.50 ±0.03 20.1 ±0.6 45.8 ±1.4 0.33 ±0.03 0.47 ±0.02 Raw + attention 23.3 ±0.8 50.5 ±1.6 0.43 ±0.03 0.52 ±0.02 21.0 ±0.7 46.5 ±1.5 0.38 ±0.03 0.49 ±0.02 Raw + Q-Former 26.1 ±0.9 55.1 ±1.7 0.41 ±0.02 0.54 ±0.03 23.2 ±0.8 50.0 ±1.6 0.39 ±0.03 0.51 ±0.02 Spectral + mean pooling 29.1 ±0.8 55.3 ±1.6 0.43 ±0.03 0.56 ±0.02 25.7 ±0.7 51.5 ±1.5 0.41 ±0.03 0.53 ±0.02 Spectral + attention 31.4 ±0.9 58.9 ±1.7 0.44 ±0.03 0.58 ±0.02 28.0 ±0.8 54.1 ±1.6 0.43 ±0.03 0.55 ±0.02 Spectral + Q-Former 34.7 ±1.0 66.2 ±1.9 0.53 ±0.04 0.63 ±0.03 30.9 ±0.9 61.5 ±1.8 0.50 ±0.03 0.59 ±0.03
> Spectral + Q-Former + T.a. 38.5 ±1.1 71.1 ±2.0 0.59 ±0.03 0.68 ±0.04 34.0 ±1.0 66.3 ±1.9 0.56 ±0.03 0.64 ±0.04

Table 6. Impact of language model backbone architecture and parameter scale on open-vocabulary retrieval performance. Backbones vary in type (Qwen vs. LLaMA) and parameter count (B). Metrics are reported under XS and XSP splits.                                                                                                                                          

> Backbone XS XP R@1 ↑R@5 ↑MRR ↑nDCG@5 ↑R@1 ↑R@5 ↑MRR ↑nDCG@5 ↑
> Qwen 2.5 1.5B 34.0 ±1.0 63.0 ±1.8 0.51 ±0.03 0.62 ±0.02 31.0 ±0.9 59.0 ±1.7 0.48 ±0.03 0.59 ±0.03 Gemma 2.0 2B 33.1 ±0.9 61.2 ±1.7 0.50 ±0.02 0.61 ±0.03 30.2 ±0.8 57.5 ±1.6 0.47 ±0.02 0.58 ±0.02 Qwen 2.5 3B 34.8 ±1.0 64.5 ±1.9 0.52 ±0.03 0.63 ±0.03 32.0 ±0.9 60.2 ±1.7 0.49 ±0.03 0.60 ±0.02
> Qwen 2.5 7B 38.5 ±1.1 71.1 ±2.0 0.59 ±0.03 0.68 ±0.03 34.0 ±1.0 66.3 ±1.9 0.56 ±0.03 0.64 ±0.03
> LLaMA 3.3 8B 35.2 ±1.0 65.5 ±1.8 0.52 ±0.03 0.64 ±0.03 32.5 ±0.9 61.0 ±1.7 0.50 ±0.03 0.61 ±0.03

signals. Such compositional structure is critical for downstream open-vocabulary modeling, where long activities must be represented as sequences of shared sub-motions. 

Comparison with alternative discretization strategies. Table 4 compares the proposed Spectral VQ-VAE with alternative tokenizers. A raw time-domain VQ-VAE exhibits high reconstruction error (XP time ℓ1 = 0.381 ) and poor token reuse (XP JS = 0.59 ). Incorporating a single spectral view improves performance (e.g., STFT VQ-VAE reduces XSP spectral ℓ1 to 0.241 ), but still lags behind the full model. The Spectral VQ-VAE achieves the lowest reconstruction error across all metrics (e.g., XS time ℓ1 = 0.082 )and the strongest invariance (XP JS = 0.24 ), confirming that jointly modeling time-domain, STFT, and wavelet representations is essential for capturing both local dynamics and frequency structure of human motion. 

Summary. The Spectral VQ-VAE learns a compact and compositional discrete representation of IMU signals that generalizes across subjects and sensor placements. Quantitative ablations identify an optimal dictionary size (𝐾 =128 ) and window length (2 s), while qualitative analysis reveals meaningful micro-activity decomposition. Together, these results establish a robust foundation for downstream sensor–language alignment and open-vocabulary wearable activity understanding.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:20 •Ray et al.

Table 7. Open-vocabulary retrieval robustness under missing-sensor evaluation. Models are evaluated using only the listed sensor subsets. Left block: models trained on all 15 positions and tested on the subset (deployment realism). Right block: models trained and tested on the same subset (oracle upper bound). Results are reported as mean ± standard deviation over three random seeds.                                                                                                                                                                                          

> Train on all 15 positions Train on inference subset Inference sensors R@1 ↑R@5 ↑MRR ↑nDCG@5 ↑R@1 ↑R@5 ↑MRR ↑nDCG@5 ↑
> All 15 positions 38.5 ±1.1 71.1 ±1.7 0.59 ±0.03 0.68 ±0.02 38.5 ±1.0 71.1 ±1.8 0.59 ±0.03 0.68 ±0.03 Wrist (r) 31.5 ±1.3 60.0 ±1.9 0.49 ±0.03 0.57 ±0.03 18.0 ±1.5 38.0 ±2.2 0.27 ±0.04 0.32 ±0.03 Thigh (l) 28.2 ±1.2 55.8 ±1.8 0.45 ±0.03 0.53 ±0.02 16.5 ±1.4 35.0 ±2.1 0.25 ±0.03 0.30 ±0.03 Head 23.6 ±1.4 48.5 ±2.1 0.39 ±0.03 0.45 ±0.02 12.0 ±1.3 28.5 ±2.0 0.18 ±0.03 0.22 ±0.03 Head + Wrist (r) 30.0 ±1.3 58.3 ±1.8 0.46 ±0.03 0.55 ±0.03 20.0 ±1.4 40.0 ±2.0 0.30 ±0.03 0.35 ±0.04 Thigh (l) + Wrist (r) 32.1 ±1.2 61.7 ±1.9 0.50 ±0.03 0.58 ±0.03 21.5 ±1.5 43.0 ±2.1 0.32 ±0.04 0.37 ±0.03 Head + Thigh (l) + Wrist (r) 33.5 ±1.3 64.0 ±1.8 0.51 ±0.03 0.61 ±0.03 24.0 ±1.4 47.0 ±2.0 0.36 ±0.04 0.41 ±0.03

6.3 Open-Vocabulary Retrieval 

We evaluate open-vocabulary wearable understanding through sensor–language retrieval . Given an IMU segment recorded from an arbitrary subset of body-worn sensors, ActNarrator must retrieve the corresponding natural-language description from a pool of candidates. This formulation directly probes semantic grounding under paraphrase, long-tail phrasing, and unseen descriptions, without assuming a closed activity taxonomy or mutually exclusive labels. Let 𝑥 denote an IMU segment observed at sensor positions P, and let 𝑡 denote a natural-language description. The model encodes sensor and text inputs as embeddings 𝑓 (𝑥 ) and 𝑔 (𝑡 ), and scores pairs via cosine similarity 

𝑠 (𝑥, 𝑡 ) = ⟨ ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ), ˆ𝑔 (𝑡 )⟩ . At inference time, for each query segment 𝑥 , all candidate descriptions {𝑡 𝑖 } are ranked by 

𝑠 (𝑥, 𝑡 𝑖 ), and retrieval metrics are computed over the ranked list. 

Baselines and model variants. We compare against representative open-vocabulary baselines: 

• IMU2CLIP [29]: contrastive IMU–text alignment trained with InfoNCE. 

• OVHAR [ 35 ]: sequence-based regression from raw IMU signals to sentence embeddings, followed by text generation. 

• PaLM-E [ 14 ]: linear projection of raw sensor streams into pseudo-token embeddings consumed by a language model. We further ablate key architectural choices in our approach: 

• Representation: raw continuous features vs. Spectral VQ-VAE tokens. 

• Conditioning: mean pooling, attention pooling, or Q-Former cross-attention. 

• LLM backbone: Qwen 2.5 (1.5B/3B/7B), Gemma (2B), and LLaMA 3.3 (8B). 

• Token-based augmentation (T.a.): stochastic token augmentations. 

Main results. Table 5 summarizes open-vocabulary retrieval performance under XS and XSP splits. All discrete token-based models substantially outperform prior approaches. For example, under XS evaluation, IMU2CLIP achieves only 10.4 R@1, while PaLM-E reaches 23.1. In contrast, our best model attains 38.5 R@1, a relative improvement of over 65% compared to the strongest baseline. Replacing raw continuous features with spectral tokens yields large and consistent gains. Under XS, moving from Raw + Q-Former to Spectral + Q-Former improves R@1 from 26.1 to 34.7 (+8.6 points), with similar gains under XSP (23.2 to 30.9). This indicates that discretized motion primitives provide a representation that aligns more reliably with language semantics than raw sensor signals.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:21

Structured conditioning further strengthens alignment. Across both representations, Q-Former conditioning outperforms mean and attention pooling. For spectral tokens under XS, Q-Former improves R@1 from 31.4 to 34.7 and MRR from 0.44 to 0.53, highlighting the importance of explicit cross-modal interaction rather than global pooling. Token-based augmentation provides additional robustness, particularly under XP. Adding augmentation increases XSP R@1 from 30.9 to 34.0 and nDCG@5 from 0.59 to 0.64, demonstrating improved generalization to unseen sensor placements. 

Effect of discretization and conditioning. The ablation results reveal a clear and consistent trend: performance improves monotonically as the model progresses from raw features to discrete spectral tokens and from pooling-based conditioning to Q-Former alignment. These gains hold across all retrieval metrics and both XS and XSP splits, confirming that both representation discretization and structured cross-attention are necessary components for strong open-vocabulary sensor–language grounding. 

LLM backbone scaling. Table 6 analyzes the effect of language model architecture and scale. Increasing model capacity improves retrieval performance up to approximately 7B parameters. For example, under XS, R@1 increases from 34.0 (Qwen 1.5B) to 38.5 (Qwen 7B), but only marginally to 35.2 with LLaMA 8B. Similar saturation is observed under XP. This suggests that sensor–language alignment quality, rather than linguistic capacity alone, is the dominant performance bottleneck in this setting. 

Missing-sensor robustness. Real-world wearable deployments rarely observe a fixed or complete sensor config-uration. Sensors may be absent due to user preference, battery constraints, or hardware failure. We therefore evaluate robustness under a missing-sensor (MS) regime, where only a subset of sensor positions is available at inference time. We consider two training conditions. In the first, models are trained on all 15 sensor positions and evaluated on subsets, reflecting realistic deployment with unexpected sensor dropout. In the second, models are trained and evaluated on the same subset, providing an oracle upper bound that removes distribution shift. Table 7 reports the results. When trained on all sensors, performance degrades gracefully as sensors are removed. Notably, even with a single wrist-mounted IMU, the model retains 31.5 R@1, compared to only 18.0 R@1 when trained exclusively on wrist data. This trend holds across all subsets: once more than one sensor is available, models trained on the full sensor set consistently outperform subset-trained counterparts. These results indicate that learning a shared, position-invariant motion vocabulary across diverse placements improves generalization under partial observability. Rather than specializing to a fixed configuration, the model learns transferable motion primitives that remain semantically meaningful even when sensing coverage is sparse. 

Summary. Discrete spectral tokenization, structured Q-Former conditioning, and token-level augmentation jointly enable strong open-vocabulary sensor–language retrieval. ActNarrator significantly outperforms prior methods, generalizes across subjects and sensor placements, and remains robust under missing-sensor conditions, supporting its suitability for realistic, heterogeneous wearable deployments. 

6.4 Closed-Set Activity Classification 

To connect with prior wearable HAR work, we evaluate closed-set classification using the expert-defined 23-class taxonomy (22 action roots plus other ), comprising bend, curl, drink, eat, jump, lie down, lift, lunge, pick, pull, push, put down, raise, read, row, run, sit, squat, pick up, stretch, walk, and dance . This setting serves as a comparative check against established benchmarks, while stress-testing classical recognition pipelines under open-vocabulary naturalistic behaviors, free-form execution styles, and sensor placement variability. Unless otherwise specified, classification uses expert hard-label segments aligned to the same temporal intervals as the   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:22 •Ray et al.

Table 8. Closed-set activity classification under cross-subject (XS) and cross-position (XP) splits. Windowed DeepConvLSTM and TinyHAR results are reported for window sizes of 1, 2, and 5 seconds. Macro-F1 is reported in percentage points. Tokenized spectral representations substantially improve robustness to sensor placement shift.                                                                                                                      

> XS XP Method (Window size) Acc. ↑Macro-F1 (%) ↑Acc. ↑Macro-F1 (%) ↑
> DeepConvLSTM (1 sec) 48.5 ±1.3 26.0 ±2.1 28.0 ±1.6 14.2 ±1.8 DeepConvLSTM (2 sec) 51.2 ±1.4 29.1 ±2.0 30.5 ±1.7 15.3 ±1.9 DeepConvLSTM (5 sec) 54.3 ±1.5 31.4 ±2.2 32.8 ±1.8 16.4 ±2.0 TinyHAR (1 sec) 50.1 ±1.4 28.3 ±2.0 30.0 ±1.7 16.1 ±1.9 TinyHAR (2 sec) 53.0 ±1.5 31.2 ±2.1 33.0 ±1.8 18.0 ±2.0 TinyHAR (5 sec) 56.1 ±1.6 34.0 ±2.2 35.2 ±1.9 19.3 ±2.1 Raw features + Q-Former (Dynamic) 68.5 ±1.7 46.2 ±2.8 48.9 ±2.0 33.5 ±2.6 Spectral tokens + Q-Former (Dynamic) 82.4 ±1.4 61.0 ±2.4 64.6 ±1.7 48.2 ±2.5 Spectral tokens + Q-Former + T.a. (Dynamic) 85.1 ±1.2 65.3 ±2.1 68.3 ±1.6 52.4 ±2.3

Table 9. Closed-set classification robustness under the missing-sensor (MS) split. Models trained on all 15 sensors consistently outperform those trained only on the available subset at inference time. Training on a restricted subset reduces performance due to limited sensor diversity, except when all 15 sensors are available. Macro-F1 is reported in percentage points.                                                                                              

> Inference subset Trained on all 15 sensors Trained on subset Acc. ↑Macro-F1 (%) ↑Acc. ↑Macro-F1 (%) ↑
> All 15 positions 85.1 ±1.2 65.3 ±2.1 85.1 ±1.2 65.3 ±2.1 Wrist (r) 62.3 ±1.4 43.6 ±2.7 48.5 ±1.6 30.8 ±2.5 Thigh (l) 58.4 ±1.5 39.8 ±2.6 45.2 ±1.7 28.5 ±2.4 Head 51.2 ±1.6 32.9 ±2.8 40.1 ±1.9 22.6 ±2.6 Head + Wrist (r) 65.7 ±1.3 46.8 ±2.5 52.0 ±1.5 34.7 ±2.4 Thigh (l) + Wrist (r) 67.8 ±1.4 48.9 ±2.6 54.6 ±1.6 36.5 ±2.5 Thigh (l) + Wrist (r) + Head 73.9 ±1.2 52.6 ±2.4 60.8 ±1.5 41.3 ±2.3

narration-based soft labels. Direct comparison with existing wearable HAR benchmarks is inherently incompatible with our formulation, which departs from scripted activities, fixed windows, and closed-set labels by design. We therefore evaluate closed-set classification only as a constrained downstream task to demonstrate that open-ended sensor–language alignment subsumes fixed-label HAR. 

Note: As shown in Fig. 1 For ActNarrator , closed-set classification is obtained by prompting the language model to map the retrieved natural-language description of each segment to one of the 23 activity classes, rather than training a dedicated classifier head. 

Baselines. We compare against two widely used contemporary wearable HAR baselines: 

• DeepConvLSTM [ 40 ], a canonical convolutional–recurrent architecture that has served as a strong baseline across numerous wearable HAR benchmarks. 

• TinyHAR [ 62 ], a lightweight model designed for efficient on-device inference, representative of modern compact HAR pipelines evaluated under fixed-window, closed-set assumptions. Both baselines operate on fixed-length windows, whereas ActNarrator provides variable-length annotated segments. We therefore adapt these models using a rolling-window protocol with window sizes of 1, 2, and 5   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:23

seconds. Predictions are made independently per window, and the final segment label is determined via majority voting across all windows overlapping the segment. 

Main results. Table 8 reports closed-set classification performance under cross-subject (XS) and cross-subject-and-position (XP) splits. While all methods achieve moderate accuracy under XS evaluation, performance degrades sharply under XP, revealing the sensitivity of conventional fixed-label HAR pipelines to unseen sensor placements. Windowed DeepConvLSTM and TinyHAR achieve XS accuracies between 48–56%, but drop to 28–35% under XP, with Macro-F1 scores falling below 20%. Increasing the window size improves XS performance (e.g., TinyHAR rises from 28.3 to 34.0 Macro-F1), but provides limited robustness to placement shift, indicating that temporal smoothing alone does not address sensor invariance. In contrast, language-conditioned models substantially outperform classical baselines. Using raw features with Q-Former conditioning already improves XSP accuracy to 48.9 and Macro-F1 to 33.5. Replacing raw features with spectral tokens yields a large additional gain, increasing XSP accuracy from 48.9 to 64.6 and Macro-F1 from 33.5 to 48.2. Adding token-based augmentation further improves robustness, reaching 68.3 XSP accuracy and 52.4 Macro-F1. Overall, spectral tokenization improves XSP Macro-F1 by over 30 percentage points relative to the strongest windowed baseline, demonstrating a significant gain in robustness to sensor placement variability. 

Missing-sensor robustness. Table 9 evaluates closed-set classification under missing-sensor inference. Models trained on all 15 sensors degrade gracefully as sensing coverage is reduced. For example, with only a single wrist-mounted IMU, the model retains 62.3 accuracy and 43.6 Macro-F1, compared to 85.1 and 65.3 when all sensors are available. Training exclusively on the inference subset leads to substantially worse performance. With a wrist-only configuration, subset-trained models drop to 48.5 accuracy and 30.8 Macro-F1, compared to 62.3 and 43.6 when trained on the full sensor set. This gap persists across all subsets and narrows only when nearly full coverage is restored. These results indicate that learning from diverse sensor placements during training produces representations that generalize more effectively under partial observability, even for closed-set recognition. 

Summary. Closed-set classification and open-vocabulary retrieval provide complementary perspectives on wearable understanding. While closed-set accuracy measures performance under a fixed taxonomy, it remains brittle under sensor placement shift and partial observability. In contrast, models built on discrete spectral representations and language-conditioned reasoning achieve strong performance in both settings, indicating that the learned motion primitives support scalable, robust, and deployment-ready wearable activity understanding. 

7 Discussion 7.1 Key Findings 

1: Closed-set windowed classifiers fail under realistic diversity. Our closed-set evaluation reveals a pronounced degradation of traditional wearable HAR pipelines under both XS and XSP conditions. While windowed Deep-ConvLSTM and TinyHAR achieve moderate XS accuracy (48–56%), their performance drops sharply under XP, with accuracies falling to 28–35% and Macro-F1 below 20%. Increasing window length improves XS performance but provides limited robustness to sensor placement shift, indicating that temporal smoothing alone does not address variability in sensor configuration or execution style. These results expose a fundamental limitation of fixed-label, window-based recognition when confronted with naturalistic behaviors, heterogeneous sensing, and partial observability, even under a relatively small closed taxonomy.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:24 •Ray et al.

2: Language grounding yields substantially more robust generalization. ActNarrator exhibits markedly more graceful degradation across XS, XP, and missing-sensor (MS) settings than closed-set classification. Although XSP remains more challenging than XS, relative performance trends are preserved: retrieval Recall@1 decreases by approximately 10–15% under XP, compared to 30–40% drops observed in closed-set accuracy. This gap indicates that grounding motion signals in a semantic embedding space, rather than forcing them into a fixed taxonomy, enables stronger generalization to unseen sensor placements and execution variability. Importantly, retrieval errors under XSP and MS are often semantically plausible (e.g., near-paraphrases or higher-level descriptions), suggesting partial semantic alignment even when exact matches fail—an outcome not captured by closed-set metrics. 

3: Discrete spectral tokenization is a key enabler of generalization. Across both open-vocabulary retrieval and closed-set classification, discrete spectral tokenization consistently outperforms raw continuous IMU features. In retrieval, replacing raw features with spectral tokens improves Recall@1 by over 8 points under XS and XP, with further gains in MRR and nDCG. In closed-set classification, spectral tokens increase XSP Macro-F1 from 33.5 to 48.2, and to 52.4 when combined with token-based augmentation. These gains are most pronounced under XSP and MS settings, where invariance to sensor placement is critical. The results suggest that quantization encourages the learning of compositional, position-invariant motion primitives that transfer reliably across sensor subsets. Without discretization, even strong conditioning mechanisms such as Q-Former yield limited robustness gains. 

4: Larger parameter sizes do not consistently yield better performance. While 7B-parameter language backbones achieve the strongest overall results across most splits, further increasing model size does not reliably improve performance. Models with comparable or larger capacity sometimes underperform their smaller counterpart. This suggests that sensor–language alignment and cross-modal representation learning, rather than raw linguistic capacity, are the primary determinants of performance. Effective architectural design and supervision therefore play a more critical role than indiscriminate scaling of the language backbone. 

5: Training with full sensor diversity improves robustness under partial observability. ActNarrator trained with full sensor coverage consistently outperform those trained only on inference-time sensor subsets, even when evaluated under missing-sensor conditions. For example, wrist-only inference achieves substantially higher performance when the model is trained on all 15 sensor positions than when trained exclusively on wrist data, across both retrieval and classification tasks. This trend persists across all subsets and narrows only when nearly full sensor coverage is restored. Exposure to diverse sensor configurations during training enables the model to learn shared, position-invariant motion representations that generalize more effectively to sparse or unexpected sensing at deployment time. 

7.2 Failure Modes and Error Analysis 

Failure cases in both retrieval and classification are dominated by semantically overlapping activities and inherently ambiguous motion patterns. In closed-set classification, confusion frequently arises between low-motion or transitional activities (e.g., standing vs. sitting ) and between manipulation-heavy actions and the other 

class, particularly under XP. In open-vocabulary retrieval, errors often correspond to plausible but less specific descriptions being ranked above the ground truth, especially for short or weakly informative IMU segments. Under missing-sensor settings, failures are more likely when discriminative motion cues are localized to absent body parts, such as head-mounted sensors for manipulation-centric activities. These errors reflect genuine information loss rather than model collapse, underscoring the importance of multi-sensor diversity.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:25

7.3 Implications for Real-World Deployment 

Our results suggest that deployment-ready wearable systems should prioritize open-vocabulary or language-grounded formulations over rigid closed-set classifiers. In realistic settings where sensor availability, placement, and user behavior cannot be controlled, retrieval-based or hybrid approaches provide substantially better ro-bustness and semantic fidelity. Training with maximal sensor diversity and adapting at inference time to partial observability emerges as a more reliable deployment strategy than training narrowly specialized models for fixed sensor configurations. Moreover, the ability to return semantically meaningful descriptions offers a practical advantage in downstream applications such as activity summarization, user feedback, and human-in-the-loop systems even when exact labels are uncertain. 

7.4 Limitations and Future Directions 

While this work demonstrates how open-ended activity narratives can be modeled and learned from wearable sensing, several limitations point to important directions for future research. 

Demographic and behavioral coverage. The dataset comprises 22 participants collected from a limited number of locations. Certain populations, including elderly users and individuals with motor impairments, are not represented. As a result, reported performance should not be assumed to generalize universally without validation on more diverse cohorts and behavioral profiles. 

Computational cost and deployment. Our strongest results rely on discrete tokenization pipelines and large pretrained language backbones (up to 8B parameters). While smaller models remain competitive, computational and memory requirements currently limit direct on-device deployment. Future work on model compression, efficient tokenization, and lightweight language alignment will be critical for translating narrative-based HAR to resource-constrained wearable platforms. Beyond these limitations, several directions naturally follow from this work. Adaptive language supervision that balances expert structure with user expressiveness may further improve semantic alignment. Continual learning from in-the-wild narrations offers a path toward personalization and long-term adaptation. Extending discrete, token-based representations to additional sensing modalities—such as audio, vision, or physiological signals—could enable richer multimodal activity narratives. Finally, developing evaluation protocols that better reflect open-world, multi-label, and temporally overlapping behaviors remains essential for advancing wearable HAR beyond closed-set benchmarks. 

8 Conclusion 

We have shown how wearable human activity recognition can be reformulated around open-ended activity narratives, enabling robust activity understanding under real-world conditions including diverse sensor place-ments, partial observability, and long-tailed, personalized behavior. Across these settings, our results demonstrate that classical closed-set classifiers degrade sharply, while the language-grounded ActNarrator model yields more robust, compositional, and placement-agnostic representations. Notably, under cross-participant evaluation, 

ActNarrator achieves 65.3% Macro-F1, compared to 31–34% for state-of-the-art closed-set HAR models, despite being trained under an open-vocabulary sensor–language alignment objective and evaluated on fixed-label classification only as a downstream task. A central implication of this result is that closed-set activity classification becomes a natural and simplified special case once sensor representations are aligned with language. Rather than requiring task-specific optimiza-tion, fixed-label recognition can be recovered by restricting the candidate description space, while the learned representations remain applicable to open-ended, compositional, and previously unseen activities. This reframes closed-set HAR as one of several downstream evaluations supported by a more general semantic representation. 

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024.

1:26 • Ray et al. 

Representation learning plays a central role: discrete spectral tokenization consistently improves performance across open-vocabulary retrieval and closed-set classification, especially under sensor placement shifts and missing sensors. This suggests that quantized representations encourage learning of compositional, position-invariant motion primitives that align naturally with language. By releasing ActivityNarrated with comprehensive documentation and reproducible baselines, we aim to support further research on narrative-centered, language-grounded wearable HAR. Our results provide quantitative evidence that modeling activities as open-ended narratives is not only conceptually necessary, but practically effective, offering a viable foundation for wearable systems that must operate under the variability and ambiguity of everyday human behavior. Finally, the proposed formulation is naturally compatible with future dataset scaling. Because activities are represented through open-ended narrative annotations rather than a fixed taxonomy, the framework supports the incorporation of additional data, new participants, or revised and richer annotations—even on the same sensor recordings—without redefining the task or retraining from scratch. This property encourages cumulative progress and supports the development of a shared platform on which the community can iteratively refine activity understanding as new data and perspectives emerge. 

References 

[1] Alireza Abedin, Mahsa Ehsanpour, Qinfeng Shi, Hamid Rezatofighi, and Damith C Ranasinghe. 2021. Attend and discriminate: Beyond the state-of-the-art for human activity recognition using wearable sensors. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 5, 1 (2021), 1–22. [2] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra, Jorge Luis Reyes-Ortiz, et al . 2013. A public domain dataset for human activity recognition using smartphones.. In Esann , Vol. 3. 3–4. [3] Marius Bock, Hilde Kuehne, Kristof Van Laerhoven, and Michael Moeller. 2024. Wear: An outdoor sports dataset for wearable and egocentric activity recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8, 4 (2024), 1–21. [4] Marius Bock, Michael Moeller, and Kristof Van Laerhoven. 2024. Temporal Action Localization for Inertial-based Human Activity Recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8, 4 (2024), 1–19. [5] Eduardo Casilari, Jose A Santoyo-Ramón, and Jose M Cano-García. 2017. Umafall: A multisensor dataset for the research on automatic fall detection. Procedia Computer Science 110 (2017), 32–39. [6] Shing Chan, Yuan Hang, Catherine Tong, Aidan Acquah, Abram Schonfeldt, Jonathan Gershuny, and Aiden Doherty. 2024. CAPTURE-24: A large dataset of wrist-worn activity tracker data collected in the wild for human activity recognition. Scientific Data 11, 1 (2024), 1135. [7] Youngjae Chang, Akhil Mathur, Anton Isopoussu, Junehwa Song, and Fahim Kawsar. 2020. A systematic study of unsupervised domain adaptation for robust human-activity recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 1 (2020), 1–30. [8] Ricardo Chavarriaga, Hamidreza Bayati, and José del R Millán. 2013. Unsupervised adaptation for acceleration-based activity recognition: robustness to sensor displacement and rotation. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 17, 3 (2013), 479–490. [9] Ricardo Chavarriaga, Hesam Sagha, Alberto Calatroni, Sundara Tejaswi Digumarti, Gerhard Tröster, José del R Millán, and Daniel Roggen. 2013. The Opportunity challenge: A benchmark database for on-body sensor-based activity recognition. Pattern Recognition Letters 34, 15 (2013), 2033–2042. [10] Chen Chen, Roozbeh Jafari, and Nasser Kehtarnavaz. 2015. UTD-MHAD: A multimodal dataset for human action recognition utilizing a depth camera and a wearable inertial sensor. In 2015 IEEE International conference on image processing (ICIP) . IEEE, 168–172. [11] Wenqiang Chen, Jiaxuan Cheng, Leyao Wang, Wei Zhao, and Wojciech Matusik. 2024. Sensor2text: Enabling natural language interactions for daily activity tracking using wearable sensors. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8, 4 (2024), 1–26. [12] Nurul Amin Choudhury, Soumen Moulik, and Diptendu Sinha Roy. 2021. HARSense: Statistical Human Activity Recognition Dataset. https://doi.org/10.21227/9pt3-2m34 [13] Gaole Dai, Huatao Xu, Hyungjun Yoon, Mo Li, Rui Tan, and Sung-Ju Lee. 2024. ContrastSense: domain-invariant contrastive learning for in-the-wild wearable sensing. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8, 4 (2024), 1–32. [14] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al . 2023. PaLM-E: an embodied multimodal language model. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning . 8469–8488. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding • 1:27 

[15] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 (2024). [16] Yu Guan and Thomas Plötz. 2017. Ensembles of deep lstm learners for activity recognition using wearables. Proceedings of the ACM on interactive, mobile, wearable and ubiquitous technologies 1, 2 (2017), 1–28. [17] Harish Haresamudram, Irfan Essa, and Thomas Plötz. 2021. Contrastive predictive coding for human activity recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 5, 2 (2021), 1–26. [18] Harish Haresamudram, Irfan Essa, and Thomas Plötz. 2022. Assessing the state of self-supervised human activity recognition using wearables. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 6, 3 (2022), 1–47. [19] Zhiqing Hong, Zelong Li, Shuxin Zhong, Wenjun Lyu, Haotian Wang, Yi Ding, Tian He, and Desheng Zhang. 2024. Crosshar: Generalizing cross-dataset human activity recognition via hierarchical self-supervised pretraining. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8, 2 (2024), 1–26. [20] Hua Kang, Qianyi Huang, and Qian Zhang. 2022. Augmented adversarial learning for human activity recognition with partial sensor sets. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 6, 3 (2022), 1–30. [21] Jennifer R Kwapisz, Gary M Weiss, and Samuel A Moore. 2011. Activity recognition using cell phone accelerometers. ACM SigKDD Explorations Newsletter 12, 2 (2011), 74–82. [22] Hyeokhyen Kwon, Catherine Tong, Harish Haresamudram, Yan Gao, Gregory D Abowd, Nicholas D Lane, and Thomas Ploetz. 2020. Imutube: Automatic extraction of virtual on-body accelerometry from video for human activity recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 3 (2020), 1–29. [23] Zikang Leng. 2025. Language-Based Cross Modality Transfer for Sensor-Based Human Activity Recognition. (2025). [24] Mohammad Malekzadeh, Richard G Clegg, Andrea Cavallaro, and Hamed Haddadi. 2018. Protecting sensory data against sensitive inferences. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Privacy by Design in Distributed Systems . 1–6. [25] Conor McCarthy, Loes Quirijnen, Jan Peter van Zandwijk, Zeno Geradts, and Marcel Worring. 2025. Hi-OSCAR: Hierarchical Open-set Classifier for Human Activity Recognition. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 9, 4, Article 199 (Dec. 2025), 27 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3770681 [26] Shenghuan Miao and Ling Chen. 2024. Goat: A generalized cross-dataset activity recognition framework with natural language supervision. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8, 4 (2024), 1–28. [27] Daniela Micucci, Marco Mobilio, and Paolo Napoletano. 2017. Unimib shar: A dataset for human activity recognition using acceleration data from smartphones. Applied Sciences 7, 10 (2017), 1101. [28] Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, and Neil Houlsby. 2023. Scaling open-vocabulary object detection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 72983–73007. [29] Seungwhan Moon, Andrea Madotto, Zhaojiang Lin, Aparajita Saraf, Amy Bearman, and Babak Damavandi. 2023. IMU2CLIP: language-grounded motion sensor translation with multimodal contrastive learning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 . 13246–13253. [30] Vishvak S Murahari and Thomas Plötz. 2018. On attention models for human activity recognition. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM international symposium on wearable computers . 100–103. [31] Atila Orhon, Arda Okan, Berkin Durmus, Zach Nagengast, and Eduardo Pacheco. 2025. WhisperKit: On-device Real-time ASR with Billion-Scale Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.10860 (2025). [32] Liangying Peng, Ling Chen, Zhenan Ye, and Yi Zhang. 2018. Aroma: A deep multi-task learning based simple and complex human activity recognition method using wearable sensors. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 

2, 2 (2018), 1–16. [33] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al . 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning . PmLR, 8748–8763. [34] Valentin Radu, Catherine Tong, Sourav Bhattacharya, Nicholas D Lane, Cecilia Mascolo, Mahesh K Marina, and Fahim Kawsar. 2018. Multimodal deep learning for activity and context recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on interactive, mobile, wearable and ubiquitous technologies 1, 4 (2018), 1–27. [35] Lala Shakti Swarup Ray, Bo Zhou, Sungho Suh, and Paul Lukowicz. 2025. Initial Findings on Sensor based Open Vocabulary Activity Recognition via Text Embedding Inversion. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops and other Affiliated Events (PerCom Workshops) . IEEE, 685–688. [36] Attila Reiss. 2012. PAMAP2 physical activity monitoring. UCI Machine Learning Repository 10 (2012), C5NW2H. [37] Jorge Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Luca Oneto, and Xavier Parra. 2015. Smartphone-based recognition of human activities and postural transitions. UCI Machine Learning Repository (2015). [38] rh20624. 2025. Awesome-IMU-Sensing: A collection of datasets, papers, and resources for Generalizable Human Activity Recognition and IMU sensing. GitHub repository. https://github.com/rh20624/Awesome-IMU-Sensing Accessed: 2026-02-01. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:28 • Ray et al. 

[39] Niloy Sikder and Abdullah-Al Nahid. 2021. KU-HAR: An open dataset for heterogeneous human activity recognition. Pattern Recognition Letters 146 (2021), 46–54. [40] Satya P Singh, Madan Kumar Sharma, Aimé Lay-Ekuakille, Deepak Gangwar, and Sukrit Gupta. 2020. Deep ConvLSTM with self-attention for human activity decoding using wearable sensors. IEEE Sensors Journal 21, 6 (2020), 8575–8582. [41] Allan Stisen, Henrik Blunck, Sourav Bhattacharya, Thor Siiger Prentow, Mikkel Baun Kjærgaard, Anind Dey, Tobias Sonne, and Mads Møller Jensen. 2015. Smart devices are different: Assessing and mitigatingmobile sensing heterogeneities for activity recognition. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM conference on embedded networked sensor systems . 127–140. [42] David Strömbäck, Sangxia Huang, and Valentin Radu. 2020. Mm-fit: Multimodal deep learning for automatic exercise logging across sensing devices. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 4 (2020), 1–22. [43] Jie Su, Fengtong Ge, Zhenyu Wen, Taotao Li, Yang Bai, Yejian Zhou, and Xiaoqin Zhang. 2025. IMUZero: Zero-Shot Human Activity Recognition by Language-Based Cross Modality Fusion. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 9, 4 (2025), 1–28. [44] Jie Su, Zhenyu Wen, Tao Lin, and Yu Guan. 2022. Learning disentangled behaviour patterns for wearable-based human activity recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 6, 1 (2022), 1–19. [45] Syncaila. 2026. Syncaila: Multi-Camera Audio and Video Auto-Sync Software. https://syncaila.com/. https://syncaila.com/ Accessed: 2026-01-30. [46] Timo Sztyler. 2017. Towards real world activity recognition from wearable devices. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops) . IEEE, 97–98. [47] Chi Ian Tang, Ignacio Perez-Pozuelo, Dimitris Spathis, Soren Brage, Nick Wareham, and Cecilia Mascolo. 2021. Selfhar: Improving human activity recognition through self-training with unlabeled data. Proceedings of the ACM on interactive, mobile, wearable and ubiquitous technologies 5, 1 (2021), 1–30. [48] Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, et al. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786 (2025). [49] Abha Tewari. 2025. HAR70+ W: Integrating Thigh-Back and Wrist Sensor Data for Enhanced Elderly Activity Monitoring. (2025). [50] Yonatan Vaizman, Katherine Ellis, Gert Lanckriet, and Nadir Weibel. 2018. Extrasensory app: Data collection in-the-wild with rich user interface to self-report behavior. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–12. [51] Yonatan Vaizman, Nadir Weibel, and Gert Lanckriet. 2018. Context recognition in-the-wild: Unified model for multi-modal sensors and multi-label classification. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1, 4 (2018), 1–22. [52] George Vavoulas, Charikleia Chatzaki, Thodoris Malliotakis, Matthew Pediaditis, and Manolis Tsiknakis. 2016. The mobiact dataset: Recognition of activities of daily living using smartphones. In International conference on information and communication technologies for ageing well and e-health , Vol. 2. SciTePress, 143–151. [53] Chongyang Wang, Yuan Feng, Lingxiao Zhong, Siyi Zhu, Chi Zhang, Siqi Zheng, Chen Liang, Yuntao Wang, Chengqi He, Chun Yu, et al .2024. Ubiphysio: Support daily functioning, fitness, and rehabilitation with action understanding and feedback in natural language. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8, 1 (2024), 1–27. [54] Lin Wang, Hristijan Gjoreski, Mathias Ciliberto, Sami Mekki, Stefan Valentin, and Daniel Roggen. 2018. Benchmarking the SHL recognition challenge with classical and deep-learning pipelines. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International Joint Conference and 2018 International Symposium on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Wearable Computers . 1626–1635. [55] Qingxin Wei, Jiaming Huang, Yi Gao, and Wei Dong. 2025. One Model to Fit Them All: Universal IMU-based Human Activity Recognition with LLM-assisted Cross-dataset Representation. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 9, 3, Article 139 (Sept. 2025), 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3749509 [56] Zejia Weng, Xitong Yang, Ang Li, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. 2023. Open-vclip: Transforming clip to an open-vocabulary video model via interpolated weight optimization. In International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 36978–36989. [57] Hua Yan, Heng Tan, Yi Ding, Pengfei Zhou, Vinod Namboodiri, and Yu Yang. 2025. Large Language Model-guided Semantic Alignment for Human Activity Recognition. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 9, 4, Article 230 (Dec. 2025), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3770652 [58] Yan Yan, Dali Chen, Yushi Liu, Jinjin Zhao, Bo Wang, Xuankun Wu, Xiaohao Jiao, Yuqian Chen, Huihui Li, and Xuchao Ren. 2021. TNDA-HAR. https://doi.org/10.21227/4epb-pg26 [59] An Yang, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoyan Huang, Jiandong Jiang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jingren Zhou, et al. 2025. Qwen2. 5-1m technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15383 (2025). [60] Haobo Yuan, Xiangtai Li, Chong Zhou, Yining Li, Kai Chen, and Chen Change Loy. 2024. Open-vocabulary sam: Segment and recognize twenty-thousand classes interactively. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 419–437. [61] Boqiang Zhang, Kehan Li, Zesen Cheng, Zhiqiang Hu, Yuqian Yuan, Guanzheng Chen, Sicong Leng, Yuming Jiang, Hang Zhang, Xin Li, et al . 2025. Videollama 3: Frontier multimodal foundation models for image and video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13106 

(2025). Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding • 1:29   

> [62] Yexu Zhou, Haibin Zhao, Yiran Huang, Till Riedel, Michael Hefenbrock, and Michael Beigl. 2022. Tinyhar: A lightweight deep learning model designed for human activity recognition. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers . 89–93.

A Design Philosophy 

Before describing the dataset and benchmark in detail, we outline the design principles that guide Activity-Narrated . These principles are direct responses to the limitations of prevailing wearable HAR pipelines, which rely on closed-set labels, fixed temporal windows, and standardized sensor placements. Together, they define an evaluation paradigm intended to surface the forms of variability that dominate real-world wearable deployments and that are typically suppressed by existing benchmarks. 

A.1 Naturalistic Behavior Through Minimal Scripting 

Everyday behavior is continuous, interruptible, and context-dependent; it does not naturally decompose into repeated trials of a fixed activity list. Accordingly, we minimize experimenter instructions and avoid scripted activity protocols. Participants are asked to wear the sensors and behave naturally for the duration of the session, choosing activities freely (e.g., reading, cooking, exercising, socializing, resting) rather than following predefined sequences. We record continuous sensor streams and treat temporal segmentation and activity extent as part of the modeling problem, not as assumptions baked into the dataset. To encourage realistic transitions and multitasking while retaining observational coverage, data are collected in an experimental space organized around multiple activity hotspots . These hotspots afford different behaviors but do not prescribe them: participants decide what to do, when to switch activities, and whether to multitask. This affordance-based design produces streams that include transitions, interruptions, and concurrent behaviors that are largely absent from scripted protocols. At the same time, it trades fully free-living collection for controllable context and reliable multi-view capture, while still avoiding a shared activity script. 

A.2 Placement Variability as a First-Class Dimension 

Sensor placement variation is a primary source of failure in real-world wearable systems. Deployments are inherently heterogeneous: devices occupy different body locations, placements vary across individuals, and sensors may be missing or repositioned over time. Rather than treating placement shift as a nuisance factor, we make it an explicit dimension of the dataset by instrumenting up to 15 body locations and supporting evaluation under heterogeneous and partial sensor configurations. This choice directly informs the evaluation design. Instead of measuring only cross-subject generalization under a fixed placement, we include regimes that require models to generalize across positions and to degrade gracefully when sensors are missing. As a result, placement robustness becomes a measurable capability rather than an implicit assumption hidden by the data collection protocol. 

A.3 Language-Grounded Supervision for Open-World Semantics 

Closed taxonomies collapse behavior into a small set of mutually exclusive labels, obscuring compositionality (e.g., “walking while texting”), concurrency, and differences in intent. In contrast, people naturally describe activity using language, which is open-ended and compositional. We therefore pair sensor streams with time-aligned natural-language descriptions and treat sensor–language alignment as the primary semantic target of the benchmark. Framing recognition around language also reframes generalization. Rather than restricting evaluation to a fixed label vocabulary, models must align sensor evidence to descriptions that may be rare, personalized, or phrased differently across participants. This better reflects real-world use, where activity semantics evolve over time and the same behavior may be described in multiple ways.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:30 •Ray et al.

A.4 Multi-Source Supervision for Flexible Evaluation 

ActivityNarrated provides three complementary sources of supervision: participant narrations, VLM-generated frame-level labels to support weak supervision, and expert post-hoc annotations provided as both soft natural-language descriptions and hard labels under a consistent taxonomy. This structure enables both open-vocabulary evaluation through language and standardized closed-set evaluation through hard labels, allowing direct compar-ison with prior wearable HAR pipelines. These supervision sources serve distinct roles. Participant narrations capture subjective intent and natural phrasing but introduce variability in wording and granularity. Expert annotations provide consistent terminology and support controlled analyses. VLM-derived labels offer an additional weak signal useful for training and ablation studies. Together, they allow researchers to examine how modeling choices behave under both personalized and standardized supervision. 

A.5 Explicit Generalization Regimes and Benchmark Tasks 

Rather than relying on a single train/test split, we define evaluation regimes that isolate deployment-relevant challenges, including cross-subject generalization, cross-position generalization, and robustness to missing sensors. We additionally support open-vocabulary generalization by evaluating alignment to language descriptions beyond the activity vocabulary observed during training. Evaluation operates over variable-duration segments, avoiding any assumption of a fixed temporal window. Making these regimes explicit serves two purposes. First, it prevents conflating improvements due to stronger feature learning with robustness to placement or sensor availability. Second, it enables targeted diagnosis: failures under cross-position splits indicate placement sensitivity, while failures under variable-length or open-vocabulary evaluation point to limitations in temporal modeling or semantic grounding. 

A.6 Ethics, Privacy, and Participant Burden 

Collecting naturalistic sensor streams and narrations requires balancing realism with participant burden and privacy, particularly in the presence of video. We keep the protocol lightweight by avoiding repeated scripted trials and design data handling and release policies to mitigate privacy risk, including informed consent and access controls for sensitive modalities. Where appropriate, we apply de-identification and redaction procedures to shared visual artifacts and separate raw recordings from derived annotations. These considerations directly affect scalability and reproducibility. Benchmarks that rely on intrusive instru-mentation or high-effort annotation protocols are difficult to extend and responsibly share. By designing the collection to be low-burden and privacy-aware, we aim to make ActivityNarrated reusable and extensible by the broader community. 

A.7 Continuity With Prior Wearable HAR Benchmarks 

While ActivityNarrated is designed for open-vocabulary, sequence-level modeling, it remains compatible with classical wearable HAR pipelines. Expert hard labels support standard closed-set evaluation, and we provide recommended preprocessing steps and splits that enable conventional windowed baselines to be evaluated alongside language-conditioned models. This interoperability allows controlled comparisons between paradigms. Researchers can quantify how perfor-mance changes when moving from fixed-window classification to sensor–language alignment and isolate the effects of placement variability, semantic open-endedness, and cross-person heterogeneity. It also lowers the barrier to adoption by allowing existing baselines to be reused and extended.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:31

Table 10. Activity hotspots and associated affordances. Hotspots encourage natural behavior without imposing a fixed script.                 

> ID Hotspot Affordances / Props
> 1Desk/Office Laptop, smartphone, notebook, pens, papers 2Exercise Yoga mat, dumbbells, barbell 3Rest Bed, mattress, pillow 4Drinking Stall Fruit, juices, water bottle, shaker, cocktail accessories 5Food Stall Plates, cutting board, knife, fruit bowl 6Open/Transition Walkway, potted plant, sprayer, watering can 7Storage/Shelf Shared items used across hotspots

A.8 Reproducible Measurement and Open Hardware 

Benchmarking wearable intelligence is inseparable from the sensing stack that produces the data. Proprietary devices and opaque firmware hinder replication and limit adoption. We therefore build ActivityNarrated around an open, reproducible hardware pipeline and release the sensing design needed to reproduce the measurements, including device specifications, firmware configuration, placement mounts, sampling settings, synchronization procedures, and collection scripts. Releasing the measurement process alongside the data lowers the barrier for reproducing or extending the dataset and helps ensure that reported improvements can be attributed to modeling rather than undocumented sensing differences. More broadly, it aligns the benchmark with open-science norms in ubiquitous computing by making both data and instrumentation transparent and reusable. 

Takeaway. Together, these principles define ActivityNarrated as an evaluation paradigm constructed to reward the capabilities required for real-world wearable understanding: open-ended semantics grounded in language, robustness to heterogeneous and missing sensor placements, and evaluation protocols that remain comparable to prior HAR work. In the next section, we describe how these principles are operationalized in the collection and annotation pipeline, including the sensing hardware, placement protocol, narration procedure, and supervision sources. 

B Hotspot mapping 

Hotspots were organized to reflect common indoor routines and included lightweight props for interaction as provided in Table 10. 

C Spectral Transformation 

To extract informative frequency-domain features from raw IMU signals, we transform each segment into spectral representations using both the Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) and the Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT). These transformations allow the model to capture temporal-frequency patterns that are essential for distinguishing human activities, especially in open-vocabulary settings. Let an IMU segment be represented as a multivariate time series: 

x(𝑡 ) = [𝑥 1 (𝑡 ), 𝑥 2 (𝑡 ), . . . , 𝑥 𝐶 (𝑡 )] ⊤, 𝑡 = 0, . . . ,𝑇 − 1 (8) where 𝐶 is the number of channels (e.g., accelerometer axes) and 𝑇 is the number of time steps in the segment.   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:32 •Ray et al.

C.1 Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) 

The STFT provides a time-localized frequency decomposition by applying the Fourier Transform on overlapping windows of the signal. For each channel 𝑐 :STFT 𝑐 (𝜏, 𝜔 ) =

> 𝐿 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

𝑥 𝑐 (𝑡 + 𝜏 ) 𝑤 (𝑡 ) 𝑒 − 𝑗𝜔𝑡 , (9) where: 

• 𝜏 is the time index of the window, 

• 𝐿 is the window length, 

• 𝑤 (𝑡 ) is a windowing function (e.g., Hamming window), 

• 𝜔 is the frequency. The magnitude |STFT 𝑐 (𝜏, 𝜔 )| is typically used as input to downstream models. 

C.2 Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) 

The CWT provides a multi-scale decomposition suitable for non-stationary signals. For channel 𝑐 :CWT 𝑐 (𝑎, 𝑏 ) = 1√︁ 

|𝑎 | 

> 𝑇 −1

∑︁  

> 𝑡 =0

𝑥 𝑐 (𝑡 ) 𝜓 ∗

 𝑡 − 𝑏 𝑎 



, (10) where: 

• 𝑎 > 0 is the scale parameter (inverse of frequency), 

• 𝑏 is the translation (time shift), 

• 𝜓 (𝑡 ) is the mother wavelet, 

• ∗ denotes complex conjugation. CWT produces a time-scale map capturing both low-frequency trends and high-frequency transients, useful for identifying short, rapid movements in IMU data. 

C.3 Segment Representation 

After applying STFT or CWT, the resulting time-frequency matrices for all channels are stacked to form a multichannel spectral representation: 

Xspec = [Spec 1, . . . , Spec 𝐶 ] ∈ R𝐶 ×𝐹 ×𝑇 ′

, (11) where 𝐹 is the number of frequency bins (or scales for CWT) and 𝑇 ′ is the number of time frames after windowing. This representation serves as input to VQ-VAE tokenization or other downstream models. STFT captures precise frequency components over short windows, whereas CWT provides a flexible multi-scale view. Both are complementary and can be combined to enhance tokenization fidelity and semantic alignment. 

D Token-Based Augmentations 

As shown in Fig. 8 discrete tokens in our framework correspond to micro-actions , short, reusable motion prim-itives that compose into higher-level activities. To encourage robustness to natural variability in execution, sensor placement, and partial observability, we apply stochastic augmentations directly in token space during training. First, removal of consecutive repeated tokens simulates temporal contraction of sustained micro-actions, reducing over-reliance on exact duration while preserving semantic meaning. Second, insertion of tokens—either sampled from nearby micro-actions or randomly chosen—introduces temporal expansion or simulates spurious observations, reflecting execution variability and sensor noise. Finally, swap operations randomly exchange   

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. ActivityNarrated : An Open-Ended Narrative Paradigm for Wearable Human Activity Understanding •1:33
> Fig. 8. Token-based augmentations for IMU sequences. Discrete sensor-token sequences are augmented via (a) token addition, (b) token dropout, and (c) random segment swapping. These operations increase compositional variability and encourage robust sensor–language alignment.

short contiguous subsequences of tokens, modeling realistic local reordering of micro-actions without changing overall activity semantics. Together, these augmentations provide a semantically grounded way to regularize the token representation, improve compositional generalization, and enhance performance under cross-subject, cross-position, and missing-sensor conditions, while remaining lightweight and fully disabled at evaluation. 

E Effect of Annotation Type 

We further analyze the role of annotation quality by comparing three sources of supervision as summarized in Table 11. Expert annotations provide the strongest and most stable supervision across all evaluation settings. Their advantage stems from consistent vocabulary, explicit grounding in observable motion, and careful temporal alignment with the IMU segments. User narrations, while scalable and diverse, introduce substantial linguistic variability and often describe higher-level intent rather than directly observable actions, resulting in lower retrieval accuracy and increased variance. VLM-based annotations perform significantly worse than both expert and user-provided descriptions. Although VLMs generate fluent and visually plausible language, their descriptions frequently hallucinate actions, omit subtle motion cues, or rely on visual priors that are weakly correlated with wearable sensor signals. This mismatch leads to poor sensor–language alignment and high instability, especially under cross-position (XP) evaluation where generalization to unseen sensor placements further amplifies annotation noise. Despite their low performance, VLM annotations serve as a useful stress test, highlighting the importance of motion-grounded language for wearable understanding and cautioning against naïvely transferring vision-centric annotations to IMU-based tasks. 

F Open-Vocabulary Inference Examples 

Figure 9 illustrates examples of ground-truth annotations compared to predictions made by ActNarrator using either all 15 sensors or just a single sensor. These examples highlight the open-vocabulary capabilities of our framework and its robustness to missing or sparse sensor inputs. 

G Effect of LLM backbone on closed Set Activity Classification 

Although closed-set classification does not require free-form language generation, the pretrained language backbone still influences representation quality through cross-modal alignment. Table 12 shows that increasing LLM capacity improves performance up to approximately 7B parameters. Under XSP evaluation, Macro-F1 increases from 46.4 (Qwen 1.5B) to 52.4 (Qwen 7B), with smaller gains beyond this scale (50.6 for LLaMA 8B). This                                                                                    

> Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024. 1:34 •Ray et al.
> Annotation type XS XP R@1 R@5 MRR nDCG@5 R@1 R@5 MRR nDCG@5
> Expert soft labels 38.5 ±1.2 71.1 ±1.5 0.59 ±0.02 0.68 ±0.02 34.0 ±1.4 66.3 ±1.7 0.56 ±0.02 0.64 ±0.02 User narrations 25.5 ±2.6 49.1 ±3.1 0.27 ±0.03 0.34 ±0.03 22.0 ±2.9 44.5 ±3.4 0.23 ±0.03 0.30 ±0.04 VLM annotations 14.2 ±3.4 22.8 ±4.1 0.18 ±0.04 0.17 ±0.05 11.5 ±3.8 18.0 ±4.6 0.14 ±0.04 0.15 ±0.05

Table 11. Comparison of open-vocabulary retrieval performance using different annotation sources under XS and XSP evaluation. Expert annotations yield the strongest and most stable alignment. User narrations introduce moderate noise but remain effective. VLM-generated annotations perform poorly and exhibit high variance, reflecting limited grounding between vision-centric language and wearable sensor signals. 

Fig. 9. Example of ground-truth annotations vs. ActNarrator predictions for all 15 vs 1 sensor input. Table 12. Effect of language model backbone size on closed-set activity classification under cross-subject (XS) and cross-position (XP) splits. All models use spectral tokens with Q-Former conditioning. Performance improves with model scale, with diminishing returns beyond 7B parameters. Macro-F1 is reported in percentage points.                                                                      

> XS XP LLM backbone Acc. ↑Macro-F1 (%) ↑Acc. ↑Macro-F1 (%) ↑
> Qwen 1.5B 80.3 ±1.4 58.1 ±2.3 62.1 ±1.6 46.4 ±2.4 Gemma 2B 79.5 ±1.5 57.4 ±2.2 61.4 ±1.6 45.7 ±2.3 Qwen 3B 82.6 ±1.3 61.2 ±2.5 65.0 ±1.4 49.3 ±2.6
> Qwen 7B 85.1 ±1.2 65.3 ±2.1 68.3 ±1.6 52.4 ±2.3
> LLaMA 8B 83.9 ±1.2 63.1 ±2.4 66.7 ±1.5 50.6 ±2.5

mirrors trends observed in open-vocabulary retrieval and suggests diminishing returns once sufficient linguistic capacity is reached. 

Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009