Title: Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.06778v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:10:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision 

# Ruijia Chen 

University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, Wisconsin, USA ruijia.chen@wisc.edu 

# Tianyi Zhang 

University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, Wisconsin, USA tzhang628@wisc.edu 

# Sanbrita Mondal 

University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, Wisconsin, USA smondal4@wisc.edu 

# Yukang Yan 

University of Rochester Rochester, New York, USA yukang.yan@rochester.edu 

# Yuhang Zhao 

University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, Wisconsin, USA yuhang.zhao@cs.wisc.edu 

> Figure 1: We investigated low-vision users’ performance and experience with head-, gaze-, and finger-based selection techniques in sitting and walking scenarios.

## Abstract 

Augmented reality (AR) can enhance visual perception for peo-ple with low vision (PLV) by overlaying multimodal information. Selection-based augmentation further allows users to flexibly choose and augment relevant information while reducing distraction and visual clutter. However, little is known about the ability and pref-erences of PLV in performing object selection techniques in AR, considering their potential visual and gaze control challenges. To understand what selection techniques are suitable for PLV to sup-port selection-based AR augmentations, we conducted a mixed-methods study with 20 PLV and 18 sighted controls who performed target selection tasks using three input techniques—head, gaze, and finger pointing with dwell-based confirmation—in two real-world scenarios (sitting vs. on the go). We found that for PLV, gaze-based selection enabled the fastest initial pointing when sit-ting and comparable overall selection time to head-based selection in both scenarios; however, due to reduced gaze stability, head-based selection remained the most stable and the least mentally demanding. Uniquely, participants with central vision loss preferred finger-based selection, reporting a greater sense of control. Our results provide empirical insights into accessible AR interaction techniques and selection-based vision enhancements for PLV. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Accessibility design and evaluation methods ; Mixed / augmented reality .

## Keywords 

Accessibility, Augmented Reality, Assistive Technologies, People with Low Vision, Selection Techniques 

## 1 Introduction 

People with low vision (PLV) have functional vision but experience uncorrectable visual impairments, such as central or peripheral vision loss, blurred vision, and night blindness [ 67 ]. Augmented re-ality (AR) technology presents potential in enhancing PLV’s visual perception by overlaying multimodal information onto the physical world, such as highlighting a searched product in grocery shop-ping [ 103 ], distinguishing the graspable and non-graspable area of kitchen tools with AR overlays [ 49 ], generating virtual labels and signs to support indoor wayfinding [ 12 , 31 , 101 ], and augmenting stairs and outlining obstacles for safe navigation [ 25 , 104 ]. How-ever, existing AR systems often assume certain types of objects to augment, overlooking users’ agency in determining and selecting what they want to augment. Prior research has highlighted the importance of sense of autonomy in assistive technologies [ 29 , 72 ]. To enhance user agency, it is critical to design selection-based augmentation systems and explore how to enable PLV to efficiently and easily select objects to augment in different scenarios. While various input techniques have been designed and evaluated in AR context, such as head-, gaze-, and finger-based selections [ 7, 8 , 45 ,52 , 60 ], prior work only focuses on the performance and experiences of sighted users [ 16 , 37 , 76 ]. In contrast to sighted users, low-vision people face unique object selection challenges. For example, they may not be able to clearly perceive a small object to accurately select it, they may face difficulty controlling their gaze stably when using gaze-based selection, or they may easily lose track of the cursor when using finger-based selection. However, no research has investigated how low-vision conditions may affect users’ ability, performance, and preferences in different selection techniques. Our research seeks to deeply understand PLV’s performance, ex-periences, challenges, and accessibility barriers across fundamental selection techniques, thus inspiring inclusive AR interactions and enabling selection-based augmentation systems. We ask: arXiv:2607.06778v1 [cs.HC] 7 Jul 2026 Chen et al. 

RQ1 : What are PLV’s ability and performance in AR target acquisition with different selection modalities? 

RQ2 : How do different low-vision conditions (e.g., visual acu-ity and visual field) shape PLV’s performance, preferences, and experiences across selection techniques and AR scenarios? To answer these research questions, we recruited 20 low-vision participants and 18 sighted control participants who performed target selection tasks in AR using head-, gaze-, and finger-based pointing techniques [ 13 , 66 , 95 ] with a dwell-based confirmation [13 , 66 , 95 ]. They conducted these tasks in both sitting and walking scenarios to represent real-world stationary and on-the-go contexts. In the stationary scenario, participants selected targets of varying sizes on a shelf. In the dynamic scenario, they walked through an indoor lab space while selecting a target located along the route. Our findings show that, for PLV, gaze-based selection enabled the fastest initial pointing in the stationary scenario and achieved com-parable overall selection time to head-based selection in both sta-tionary and dynamic scenarios. However, PLV experienced greater difficulty in maintaining gaze dwelling stability than sighted partic-ipants. In contrast, head-based selection remained the most stable technique across target sizes, scenarios, and user groups, with sig-nificantly shorter confirmation time, fewer cursor reentries during dwelling for small target selection, and more positive perceived ex-perience by PLV. We also identified a compounded effect of reduced acuity and restricted peripheral field on both selection efficiency and stability. Uniquely, participants with central vision loss pre-ferred finger-based selection, reporting a greater sense of control. In summary, we contribute the first empirical study investigating PLV’s ability and experience across typical object selection tech-niques in stationary and dynamic AR contexts. Our research sheds light on accessible AR interaction techniques and inspires future selection-based vision enhancements for PLV. 

## 2 Related Work 

We review prior work on assistive technologies for PLV in AR, as well as research on selection techniques in mixed reality. 

## 2.1 Assistive Technologies for PLV in AR 

Many assistive AR systems have been developed to support PLV in daily tasks, including navigation [ 12 , 25 , 101 ], kitchen preparation [49 ], item searching [ 103 ], and exercise [ 3 , 48 ]. Some of these sys-tems provide generic augmentations over the full field of view that enhance all visual elements [ 4 , 32 , 62 , 102 ]. For example, Hwang and Peli [ 32 ] implemented an edge enhancement system on Google Glass to increase contrast for people with age-related macular de-generation. Angelopoulos et al. [ 4 ] used color-coded wireframes to present depth information for people with retinitis pigmentosa. However, these systems indiscriminately enhance all visual informa-tion without considering what users want to augment, potentially resulting in visual clutter and distraction. Some other systems instead focus on augmenting predefined object categories for certain contexts [ 3, 12 , 25 , 31 , 34 , 49 , 103 ]. For example, Huang et al. [ 31 ] designed an AR system that detects text signs and replaces them with enhanced text or verbal descriptions to assist sign reading. CookAR [ 49 ] highlights kitchen tool affordances (e.g., knife handles vs. blade) to support safe kitchen preparation. VisiMark [ 12 ] augments selected landmark types in AR to support indoor navigation. While these systems constrain augmentation to relevant object types, they do not allow users to proactively select what to augment. Since user needs vary across tasks, environments, and personal preferences [ 41 ], it is critical to support user agency in flexibly specifying augmentation targets [ 29 ]. However, no work has investigated how to enable PLV users to easily and accurately select objects in real-world AR environments. The most relevant line of work explores region-based visual enhancement that follows the user’s finger or gaze [ 42 , 56 , 57 , 84 ]. For example, Stearns et al. [ 83 , 84 ] designed an AR magnification system that combines a finger-worn camera or handheld phone with HoloLens to present magnified content. It allows users to control the magnified area by moving their finger or the phone. Maus et al. [ 57 ] designed a screen magnifier that follows users’ gaze movement. Similarly, VRiAssist [ 56 ] developed gaze-following visual corrections to compensate for the distorted area of the user’s eyes in virtual reality. However, these systems often directly attach enhancements to finger-pointed or gaze position and arbitrarily augment all regions that the user bypasses beyond their intent, causing the “Midas touch” issue [36] for augmentations. GazePrompt [ 92 ] demonstrated the potential of intent-aware augmentations by detecting PLV’s gaze behaviors and generating augmentations on a certain word or line in reading tasks. However, it detected user intent implicitly and did not allow direct control from the users, limiting their sense of autonomy. Our work empha-sizes the importance of user-initiated augmentations, investigating suitable AR selection techniques for PLV to enable them to flexibly select objects they want to augment in various daily contexts. 

## 2.2 Selection Techniques in Mixed Reality 

Using different body parts as input for selection in mixed reality has long been studied for sighted users. For example, head-based target selection [ 8, 45 , 60 ] allows users to aim at targets via head orienta-tion and are widely supported in commercial mixed reality headsets such as Meta Quest [ 30 ], Microsoft HoloLens [ 1], and Apple Vi-sion Pro [ 35 ]. With the development of hand tracking technologies, direct hand interactions have become a popular technique that enables mid-air pointing and selection without holding controllers [7 , 27 , 52 , 69 , 96 ]. Gaze-based selection [ 8 , 45 , 60 ] relies on eye track-ing technology to infer users’ visual focus and identify the target object. To mitigate unintended target activation during pointing, prior research has also explored different confirmation mechanisms, such as dwell time [ 51 , 66 , 73 , 100 ] and gestures [ 5, 21 , 61 , 64 ]. Be-yond conventional “pointing and confirming” selection, alternative selection techniques have been designed to improve efficiency, such as motion matching selection [18–20, 87]. Previous studies have compared various techniques and shown advantages and drawbacks of different techniques. For example, Blattgerste et al. [ 8 ] found that aiming targets via gaze was signifi-cantly faster and less exhausting than via head. Similarly, Jalaliniya et al. [ 37 ] found that gaze pointing was significantly faster than head pointing, but head motion was more accurate and convenient. In contrast, Qian et al. [ 76 ] found that gaze-based selection of-fered worse performance in terms of error rate, selection time, and throughput compared to head-based selection. While head-based Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision pointing offers hands-free and stable interactions, prior work sug-gests that finger-based pointing achieves higher perceived usability, with no significant differences in task completion time [7]. Some research has explored how to combine different inputs to facilitate target selection, such as gaze and finger [ 38 , 44 , 55 , 81 , 89 ], gaze and head [ 45 , 81 ], and head and finger [ 38 , 45 , 81 ]. For example, Kytö et al. [ 45 ] decomposed selection into two stages—pointing and refinement—and investigated combinations of head, gaze, and finger input across these stages for precise selection. Sidenmark et al. [ 81 ] proposed Cone&Bubble, a two-stage technique in which gaze supported rapid candidate selection and controller input enabled precise adjustment. Other works explored gaze-hand coordination for region selection [ 80 ], target selection at different depths using gaze with a controller [ 11 ] or with hands [ 88 ], and multi-object selection through gestures assisted by gaze [44]. While prior research has investigated how basic selection tech-niques can be used individually or in combination to improve target selection, they have primarily focused on sighted users. To our knowledge, no work has examined how PLV perceive and compare these basic selection techniques. Due to their diverse visual con-ditions, PLV may face distinct challenges and perform differently with these selection techniques. We aim to fill this gap by evaluating the performance and experiences of PLV using head-, gaze-, and finger-based selection techniques in comparison to sighted users. 

## 3 Methods 

Our goal is to investigate three commonly used AR selection tech-niques (head-, gaze-, and finger-based [ 7, 8, 45 , 60 ]) with PLV, un-derstanding their experiences, challenges, and interaction patterns in relation to visual abilities. We collected low-vision and sighted participants’ performance, behavioral, and experiential data in both stationary and dynamic scenarios and analyzed the results using qualitative and quantitative methods. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at our university. 

## 3.1 Participants 

We recruited 20 PLV (L1-L20) and 18 sighted control participants (S1-S18) for our study. Our low-ision participants included 8 females, 11 males, and one non-binary, whose ages range from 19 to 91 (Mean = 58.7, SD = 19.6). Participants covered a wide range of low-vision conditions with a relatively balanced distribution across low vs. high visual acuity, and mild vs. severe peripheral field loss (see Table 1 in Appendix A). We recruited low-vision participants from a local low-vision clinic and via our university research email service. Two participants did not complete all tasks: L19 did not complete tasks in the dynamic scenario because of time constraints, and L20 did not complete small target selection tasks in the dynamic scenario due to low visibility. Participants were compensated at $20/hour and reimbursed up to $30 for travel expenses. Our sighted participants included 11 females and 7 males, aged from 20 to 73 (Mean = 36.1, SD = 15.6; see Table B in Appendix B). They were recruited via our university research email service. All sighted participants had visual acuity of at least 20/25 in the better eye (20/20 with correction) and intact visual fields. They were compensated at $10/hour. PLV received higher compensation because of increased participation efforts. 

## 3.2 Three selection techniques: Head-, Gaze-, and Finger-based Selection 

Object selection includes two stages: (1) Pointing: the user specifies a target through pointing, and (2) Confirmation: the user triggers the selection through certain interaction techniques [ 8]. We evaluated three pointing techniques: (1) head-based pointing [ 8, 45 , 60 ], where users aim at a target by moving their head and a cursor locked to the center of the AR display moves along 1; (2) gaze-based pointing [ 8, 45 , 60 ], where users aim at a target via eye movement and the cursor follows the gaze position; and (3) finger-based pointing [7 , 27 , 52 , 96 ], where users point at a target using their index finger and the cursor follows a ray cast from the finger. For selection confirmation, we adopted a commonly used dwell-based method. Prior work has shown that dwell-based confirmation is effective when hands-free interaction and high reliability are required [ 95 ]. The dwell time threshold was set to 0.8s based on prior literature [ 13 , 66 ] and tested in a non-representative pilot study with two sighted users and four low-vision users. A visible cursor was presented to indicate the current pointing location in the 3D space, following the prior finding that visual cursor feedback improves dwell-based selection performance [ 95 ]. The cursor was a circle with a radius of 1.5 ◦ visual angle at 1 meter. The cursor size was chosen to align with previously reported eye tracker accuracy (1.3–1.8 °) [ 6] to reduce the impact of eye tracking offset on selection accuracy. The dwell timer was triggered when the cursor overlapped with a target. Once the dwell time reached 0.8s, the system played an auditory cue (“Ding”) to indicate task completion; otherwise, the trial timed out after 20s. 

## 3.3 System Implementation 

To evaluate the AR selection techniques in a real-world setting, we implemented an end-to-end pipeline including a head-mounted in-terface that supports the target selection techniques and a backend for real-world object segmentation. The frontend ran on a Meta Quest 3 headset with an integrated Pupil Labs Neon eye tracker (60 Hz, synchronized with head and finger tracking) [ 46 ], handling user input sensing and feedback rendering. The backend ran on a laptop with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080 GPU, performing real-time target detection through computer vision models. We ran a real-time object detection model to identify task targets (jars and stop signs in our study; see Section 3.5). The detection model was based on YOLOv8 [ 40 ] and fine-tuned with a combi-nation of MS-COCO images containing jars and glasses [ 53 ], stop sign images from the Mapillary Vistas dataset [ 68 ], and additional images captured in the physical lab environment used for the study. While the target identification mainly relied on computer vision, missed detection due to motion blur or lighting changes in the real world could affect selection performance. We thus implemented a fallback mechanism by tracking the target position through a spatial anchor (i.e., persistent spatial references in the AR coordinates to represent the positions and orientations of a virtual object in the physical world [ 59 , 63 ]). We created a spatial anchor for each target at the beginning of each selection trial using the detection result from the starting frame. When the vision model failed to recognize 

> 1We adjusted the cursor position on the AR display for some low-vision participants with central vision loss to ensure the visibility of the cursor.

Chen et al. a target in a given frame, the system fell back to the spatial anchor. Because spatial anchors may drift as the user moves [ 59 ], especially in the dynamic scenario, we updated the spatial anchor manually when needed (e.g., the target was correctly recognized but the spatial anchor drifted) based on the latest target detection result. 

## 3.4 Gaze Calibration and Cursor Adjustment 

To ensure high quality gaze tracking for PLV, we took additional steps for gaze calibration. Our Neon eye tracker adopted machine learning-based gaze estimation without traditional calibration [ 46 ]. Based on the initial gaze estimation, Neon allows a simple post-hoc offset correction to compensate for individual differences: the user stares at a target in the center field while a researcher can manually drag the estimated cursor position to the target [ 47 ]. However, this method does not consider different offsets across different viewing directions, which may cause more severe issues for PLV. We thus expanded this post-hoc offset correction by considering different viewing directions through a customizable interface. Our calibration interface rendered 16 target dots in a 4 × 4 layout. All targets were world-anchored, allowing participants to move their heads freely to fixate on each target. This 3D setup can better reflect real-world viewing behaviors than screen-based calibration. Participants were asked to fixate on each calibration target while a local offset was measured (i.e., the angular difference between the target position and the estimated gaze direction). We then applied these local offsets in real-time gaze estimation. We had two offset correction methods: (1) an average global offset across all local offsets, or (2) an average local offset derived from the four calibra-tion targets nearest to the current gaze estimate in angular space, inspired by k-nearest neighbors algorithm [ 39 , 43 ]. We validated both methods with a 5-dot validation interface for each participant and applied the method that had smaller angular errors. To ensure calibration accessibility, we allowed target size and color customization, verbally instructed target location if it fell out of users’ functional field, and adopted dominant-eye-based data collection if a user exhibited inconsistent gaze behaviors between two eyes or had one untrackable eye, following prior work [93]. Our calibration resulted in a mean angular error of 1.51 ° (SD = 0.58) for 15 PLV (excluding L02, whose validation data were accidentally deleted, and four participants with central scotomas), and 1.45 ° (SD = 0.57) for 18 sighted participants. Both values fall within the reported eye tracker accuracy range (1.3–1.8 °) [6]. Notably, four participants experienced central vision loss (CVL) with central scotomas (i.e., central dark spots). They faced difficulty with calibration as they were unable to see the calibration targets with central vision. Instead, they relied on the preferred retinal locus 

(PRL, a "pseudo-fovea" in the peripheral retinal region close to central vision) to view visual content [ 17 , 97 ]. However, because people with CVL often rely on multiple PRLs [17, 50], our current offset correction method for gaze tracking does not apply. We thus manually adjusted the gaze cursor to one of the user’s PRLs to ensure cursor visibility, enabling them to control the cursor via eye movement (although the cursor does not always align with their preferred PRL when viewing a certain area). We discuss their unique experiences in Section 4.2.3.   

> Figure 2: Stationary scenario setup (left): a shelf with eight target locations (3 ×3 grid, center excluded). Dynamic scenario setup (right): an 8m walking route with a stop sign 1 m from the path.

To reduce eye tracking instability and signal loss caused by blinking, we applied a histogram-based filter for gaze tracking [ 8]with a 10 frames filter window determined by a pilot study with both sighted and low-vision participants. 

## 3.5 Environments: Two Real-World Scenarios 

We asked participants to conduct real object selection in AR instead of virtual target selection to better reflect real-world experiences, as virtual lighting and artificially defined target boundaries may alter PLV’s perception. We included two scenarios—selecting objects on a shelf and selecting targets while walking—to represent typical real-world stationary and dynamic contexts. Since target sizes may also significantly influence PLV’s viewing and selection ability, we introduced two target sizes in each scenario. We conducted the study in a well-lit indoor lab environment. For the stationary scenario, participants sat one meter in front of a shelf with the shelf center aligned with their eye level (Figure 2 left). We prepared target objects in two common household container sizes (2 oz and 24 oz). The targets were yellow in high contrast against the black background. The shelf was arranged in a 3 × 3 layout, providing eight target directions and positions (center excluded). For the dynamic scenario, we used two stop signs as targets, which are commonly encountered in outdoor navigation environ-ments, measuring 6 and 18 inches in width, respectively. The target sizes were determined based on pedestrian signal specifications from the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices [ 22 ] and typ-ical bus stop sign dimensions. We designed a walking route of 8 meters and marked the route on the floor using colored tape to indicate walking direction. At the midpoint of the route, we defined two possible target locations, each positioned one meter away from the walking path on opposite sides of the route, to avoid bias toward a single viewing direction (Figure 2 right). The target height aligned with the participants’ eye level. 

## 3.6 Procedure 

The study consisted of a single session (1.5–2 hours for sighted par-ticipants; 2–2.5 hours for PLV). We started with an initial interview to collect participants’ demographic information, visual conditions, and prior experience with AR. 

Visual ability test. For PVL, we then conducted a visual abil-ity test. We first measured participants’ visual acuity with wall-mounted letter-size ETDRS 1 and ETDRS 2 logMAR charts [ 23 ] for the right and left eye, respectively. Our visual acuity test covered a range from 20/10 to 20/400. We also measured participants’ visual field with a simplified visual field test interface based on prior work [93 ], covering 60 ◦ × 44 ◦ central visual field. For participants whose Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision visual acuity or visual field fell outside the measurable range of our tests, we reported their self-reported values. 

Selection in Stationary Scenario. After eye tracking calibra-tion, participants completed target selection tasks in a stationary scenario in front of a shelf using three selection techniques, with 16 trials per technique (2 target sizes × 8 target locations). Before each trial, the environment was temporarily blacked out, and par-ticipants fixated on a virtual white crosshair anchored at the center of the shelf to ensure a consistent starting point across trials. Once an audio cue was played that indicated the start of a trail, the scene became visible. Participants were asked to select the target on the shelf as quickly and accurately as possible. A researcher manually adjusted the target position on the shelf between trials when the AR display was blacked out. A trial ended with an auditory cue upon selection or timeout. After selection trials with each technique, par-ticipants rated technique effectiveness and task workload through NASA-TLX [ 28 ] on 7-point Likert scales. We counterbalanced the order of techniques and target sizes using Latin Square [ 79 ] and randomized the order of target position. 

Selection in Dynamic Scenario. Participants then completed selection tasks in a dynamic scenario by walking along a predefined route while selecting a target, with four trials per technique (2 tar-get sizes × 2 target locations). Participants were asked to walk at a comfortable, self-determined pace (i.e., without running) to reflect their real-world walking speed and to complete the target selection as quickly as possible. They were encouraged to avoid unnecessary slowing or stopping, but were allowed to pause if it was necessary to complete the selection. Participants needed to complete the se-lection task (or timeout) and continued walking to pass the end marker of the route to end the trial. A similar target repositioning method to the stationary scenario was used between trials. After each technique, participants rated technique effectiveness and task workload again. Counterbalancing and randomization strategies mirrored the stationary scenario. We ended our study with a semi-structured interview in which participants ranked the three selection techniques and discussed their selection experiences, challenges, and suggestions. 

## 3.7 Analysis 

We analyzed the quantitative data from 18 low-vision participants (L01–L18) and 18 sighted participants (S01-S18) as two low-vision participants (L19, L20) did not complete all selection tasks (Section 3.1). Our qualitative analysis involved all 20 low-vision participants. 

3.7.1 Quantitative Analysis. We quantitatively analyzed the impact of technique and visual condition on target selection performance. 

Measures. We divide the target selection process into a pointing stage and a confirmation stage (Section 3.2). We define the time point that splits these two stages as the time of First Attempt , which represents the moment when a participant indicates their first at-tempt to dwell on a target. This concept distinguishes the “true” first landing from the time when the cursor first overlaps with the target to mitigate impact of potential “Midas Touch” [ 36 ]. For gaze-based selection, the First Attempt moment is detected as the first fixation landing on the target; and for head- or finger-based selection, it is detected when the cursor remains overlapping with the target for at least 70 ms (the minimum fixation durations [ 75 ]). Based on the First Attempt concept, we define performance measures below. For the static task, we defined four measures: (1) SelectionTime is the time spanning from the selection task onset to the moment when the dwell-time threshold was triggered or timed out. It measures the whole selection efficiency. (2) PointingTime is the time from the task onset to First Attempt moment. It measures the pointing efficiency. (3) ConfirmationTime is the time from the First Attempt moment to the selection completion or timeout. Note that participants may fail to maintain the cursor in the target for the dwell time threshold and try again before timeout. (4) ReentryTimes is the number of times the cursor reentered the target boundary after the First Attempt. Both ConfirmationTime and ReentryTimes indicate a user’s ability to maintain cursor stability within a target. For the dynamic task, we defined two additional measures for walking performance beyond the above measures: (1) WalkingTime ,the time from the onset of the walking task until the participant crossed the endpoint; and (2) SelectionTimeInWalking , defined as the ratio of SelectionTime to WalkingTime , reflecting the interference between the selection and walking tasks in this dual-task setting. All participants completed the selection tasks within the prede-fined time limit, except for L14 in the dynamic task. L14 experienced timeouts in 1/4, 2/4, and 3/4 trials with head-, gaze-, and finger-based selection, respectively. For these trials, we set SelectionTime to the timeout limit (20 s) and ReentryTimes to the maximum observed across PLV participants (12 times). 

Factors & Tests. We have two within-subject factors: Technique 

(three levels: head- vs. gaze- vs. finger-based) and Size (two levels: large vs. small) and a between-subject factor Vision (two levels: sighted vs. low-vision). To validate the counterbalancing, we in-volved another within-subject factor Order and found no significant effect of Order on any measures. We checked the normality of each measure using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Since none of these measures were normally distributed, we applied the Aligned Rank Transform (ART) ANOVA [ 98 ] to evaluate the effect of different factors on different measures. We conducted post-hoc comparisons using Tukey’s HSD correction if significant effects were observed. We report effect sizes using partial eta squared ( 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

), with 0.01, 0.06, 0.14 representing the thresholds of small, medium and large effects [15]. For PLV, we further examined the impact of low-vision condi-tions (reduced visual acuity, reduced peripheral vision) on user performance. We included two additional between-subject factors: 

PeripheralVision and VisualAcuity . We defined PeripheralVision into two levels: SevereFieldLoss , defined as moderate to severe peripheral vision loss with a remaining visual field of less than 60 °, correspond-ing to the far peripheral vision threshold [ 82 ], and MildFieldLoss ,defined as mild to no peripheral vision loss with a visual field wider than 60 °. We thus have seven participants in the SevereFieldLoss 

level and eleven in the MildFieldLoss level. VisualAcuity also has two levels, LowAcuity and HighAcuity , using 20/100 in the better eye as the threshold [ 24 ]. This resulted in nine participants in the 

LowAcuity level and nine in the HighAcuity level. We adopted mixed-effects modeling for repeated measures [ 10 ,26 , 86 ] to handle the unbalanced sample sizes across conditions. Specifically, we used linear mixed-effects models (LMMs) [ 26 ] for Chen et al. 

SelectionTime , PointingTime , and ConfirmationTime , after applying a log transformation to positively skewed variables to improve normality and variance stability. For ReentryTimes , we used gener-alized linear mixed-effects models (GLMMs) [ 10 ] with a negative binomial distribution. All models included participant as a random intercept, and we conducted post-hoc comparisons using Tukey’s HSD correction when significant effects were observed. No order effects were found for any measures. 

3.7.2 Qualitative Analysis. We audio-recorded all study sessions, transcribed them using Whisper [ 77 ], and manually fixed transcrip-tion errors. We analyzed the transcripts using thematic analysis [ 9, 14 ]. Two researchers independently open-coded the same 10 transcripts (5 PLV, 5 sighted; 26.3% of the data) and collaboratively developed an initial codebook by resolving disagreements through discussion. The remaining transcripts were then coded indepen-dently, with periodic checks to ensure consistency. The codebook was iteratively refined. We developed themes from the codes using a combination of inductive and deductive approaches [ 9 ]. Guided by our research goal of understanding different low-vision users’ experiences and challenges with AR selection techniques, we identified high-level themes deductively and generated sub-themes inductively by clus-tering relevant codes using axial coding and affinity diagrams. Re-searchers cross-referenced the data and codebook to iteratively refine themes and ensure appropriate code categorization. 

## 4 Results 

To answer our two research questions, we first compare the selec-tion performance and behaviors between low-vision and sighted participants through both quantitative and qualitative results. We then examine how visual abilities (visual acuity and visual field loss) affect selection performance among PLV. Full statistical results are summarized in Table 3 and 4 in Appendix C and D. 

## 4.1 Selection Performance of Low-Vision Users 

We report low-vision participants’ target selection efficiency, stabil-ity, and impact on walking performance across different selection techniques, in comparison to sighted controls to reflect their target selection ability and preferences. 

4.1.1 Selection Efficiency. We first report participants’ selection efficiency through the overall selection time and pointing time in both stationary and dynamic scenarios. 

Stationary Scenario. We found a significant main effect of Vi-sion (𝐹 1,34 = 30 .5/28 .3, 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .47 /.45 ) on both SelectionTime 

and PointingTime , with low-vision users spending significantly longer time than sighted participants ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 362 /368 , 𝑝 < .001 ). For PointingTime , we also found a significant Technique main effect (𝐹 2,1682 = 206 .1, 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .20 ), as shown in Figure 3 top-right. Post-hoc comparisons showed that gaze-based selection enabled the fastest initial target landing ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 = 469 , 𝑝 < .001 ;

𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = −241 , 𝑝 < .001 ), while finger-based was consistently the slowest ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 228 , 𝑝 < .001 ). When examining SelectionTime , we found a significant three-way interaction effect ( 𝐹 2,1682 = 6.2, 𝑝 = .002 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .02 ), indicating different technique performance across Vision and Size (see Fig-ure 3 top-left). For sighted users as well as PLV who selecting large targets, we saw that gaze achieved the best performance, followed by head, and finger selection behaved the slowest (all 

𝑝 ≤ 0.034 ). However, when PLV selected small targets, no sig-nificant differences were found between gaze- and head-based selection ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = −139 , 𝑝 = .085 ), while finger-based selection remained the slowest ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 317 , 𝑝 < .001 ;

𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 = 456 , 𝑝 < .001 ). 

Dynamic Scenario. We found a significant main effect of Tech-nique (𝐹 2,386 = 108 .5, 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .36 ) on SelectionTime during walking (see Figure 3 bottom-left). Finger-based selection resulted in significantly longer selection time than both gaze- and head-based selection ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 128 , 𝑝 < .001 ; 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 = 120 ,

𝑝 < .001 ), while no significant difference was observed between gaze- and head-based selection ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 8, 𝑝 = .692 ). A sig-nificant three-way interaction effect ( 𝐹 2,386 = 3.3, 𝑝 = .036 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .02 )revealed different effects of Size across techniques and groups. For sighted participants, Size did not affect gaze-based selection per-formance ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −44 , 𝑝 = .254 ), but the performance of head- and finger-based selection significantly dropped as the target size de-creased (head: 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −101 , 𝑝 < .001 ; finger: 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −111 , 𝑝 < .001 ). In contrast, for PLV, size effects were significant across all tech-niques (gaze 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −81 , 𝑝 < .001 ; head 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −59 , 𝑝 = .020 ; finger 

𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −78 , 𝑝 < .001 ). Further, Vision had a significant effect in several conditions, with PLV spending more time than sighted par-ticipants in gaze-based selection (both large and small targets) and head-based selection with large targets (all 𝑝 ≤ .022 ). For PointingTime , we also found a significant Technique × Vision 

× Size interaction effect ( 𝐹 2,386 = 3.0, 𝑝 = .049 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .02 ), as shown in Figure 3 bottom-right. For sighted participants, finger-based selection resulted in significantly longer initial target landing time than both gaze- and head-based selection (all 𝑝 ≤ .015 ). For PLV, no significant differences between techniques were found with large targets (all 𝑝 ≥ .261 ), whereas with small targets, finger-based selection resulted in significantly longer time than gaze-based selection ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 94 , 𝑝 < .001 ). The effect of Size was significant for sighted participants with head-based selection, and for both sighted and PLV with finger-based selection (all 𝑝 ≤ .005 ). Additionally, PLV required more time than sighted participants at the pointing stage for gaze- and head-based selection across target sizes (all 

𝑝 ≤ .044 ), but not for finger-based selection, possibly reflecting a floor effect [ 54 , 90 ], where performance was already constrained by balance and arm movement coordination in walking [74]. 

Interpretations: In the stationary scenario, gaze-based selection consistently achieved the fastest initial target landing and overall selection time for sighted users and for PVL selecting large targets. However, this advantage diminished under walking conditions, and for PLV with small targets in the stationary scenario, with gaze and head showing comparable performance. Additionally, in the dynamic scenario, for SelectionTime , gaze-based selection was less sensitive to target size for sighted partic-ipants, whereas this advantage did not persist for PLV. For Point-ingTime , both gaze- and head-based selection were less sensitive to target size for PLV, while only gaze-based selection showed reduced size sensitivity for sighted participants. Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision              

> Figure 3: Mean SelectionTime and PointingTime across different techniques, target sizes, and scenarios. Orange color represents performance on small targets, while blue represents large targets. In the stationary scenario, gaze-based selection consistently achieved the fastest initial target landing and overall selection time for sighted users and for PVL selecting large targets. However, this advantage diminished under walking conditions, and for PLV selecting small targets in the stationary scenario, with gaze and head showing comparable performance. *** 𝑝 <.001 , ** 𝑝 <.01 , * 𝑝 <.05 .

These findings highlighted the potential of gaze-based selection for both sighted and low-vision users. However, reduced target size and increased movement variability imposed greater stability demands in gaze control, especially for low-vision users, reducing the performance gap between gaze- and head-based selection and making head-based selection to be another feasible option for PLV in many conditions (e.g., small targets in stationary scenario, and dynamic scenario). 

4.1.2 Selection Stability. We report selection stability through con-firmation time and re-entry times during dwelling to reflect PLV’s ability in dwelling on targets with different input modalities. 

Stationary Scenario. We found no significant effects of Vision 

on both ConfirmationTime and ReentryTimes . For both measures, we found significant interaction effects of Technique × Size (𝐹 2,1682 =

88 .8/23 .6, 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .10 /.03 ), indicating that target size affected technique performance differently. With gaze-based and finger-based dwelling, small targets took longer for users to confirm a selection and also resulted in more re-entries than large targets (gaze: 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −129 /− 194 , 𝑝 < .001 ; finger: 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −224 /− 221 , 𝑝 <

.001 ), but no significant difference was observed between target sizes for head-based confirmation. We also found significant three-way interactions of Technique 

× Size × Vision on both measures ( 𝐹 2,1682 = 88 .8/74 .4, 𝑝 < .001 ,

𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .10 /.08 ), as shown in Figure 4 top row. For small targets, head-based confirmation resulted in significantly shorter time than finger-based confirmation for sighted participants ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 179 , 𝑝 < .001 ), and shorter than both finger- and gaze-based confirmation for PLV (𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 267 , 𝑝 < .001 ; 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 152 , 𝑝 = .004 ). Head-based also showed significantly fewer re-entries than both finger- and gaze-based confirmation for both groups (sighted/PLV: 

𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 204 /300 , 𝑝 < .001 ; 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 129 /258 , 𝑝 =

.017 /< .001 ). However, for large targets, no significant differences between technique performance were observed across groups for both measures (all 𝑝 ≥ .097 ). 

Dynamic Scenario. We found no main effect of Vision on either 

ConfirmationTime or ReentryTimes . However, a significant three-way interaction effect on ConfirmationTime (𝐹 2,386 = 10 .7, 𝑝 < .001 ,

𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .05 ) indicated different effects of Vision on performance across techniques and target sizes. Specifically, PLV required more time than sighted participants to confirm a selection on small targets when using gaze ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 90 , 𝑝 = .014 ), but there is no difference between sighted and low-vision users when dwelling with finger or head, or dwelling on large targets (all 𝑝 ≥.982). The three-way interaction also indicated different effects of Size 

across techniques and user groups. For ConfirmationTime , small targets significantly increased confirmation time for PLV with gaze (𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 110 , 𝑝 < .001 ), but there is no such effect for other technique-vision combinations (all 𝑝 ≥ .052 ). For ReentryTimes , a significant three-way interaction ( 𝐹 2,386 = 5.3, 𝑝 = .005 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .03 ) showed size effects for PLV using gaze- or finger-based confirmation (gaze: 

𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 95 , 𝑝 = .002 ; finger: 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 81 , 𝑝 = .019 ), but not with head-based confirmation, nor for sighted participants (all 𝑝 ≥ .066 ). Technique performance also differed across groups and target sizes for both measures, as shown in Figure 4 bottom row. For sighted participants, finger-based confirmation resulted in longer time and more re-entries than both gaze- and head-based confir-mation (all 𝑝 ≤ .013 ). For PLV, with large targets, head-based con-firmation resulted in shorter time ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 108 , 𝑝 < .001 ) and fewer re-entries than finger-based confirmation ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 105 , 𝑝 < .001 ), whereas with small targets, head-based confirmation outperformed both gaze- and finger-based confirmation (all 𝑝 < .001 ). 

Interpretations: Overall, we found that PLV and sighted partic-ipants showed comparable selection stability in both tasks, except when dwelling on small targets with gaze in the dynamic task. Head-based dwelling remained the most stable across tasks, user groups, and target sizes, while finger-based technique showed the lowest stability, with gaze-based dwelling staying in-between. How-ever, the stability advantage of head- over gaze-based dwelling was reduced for sighted participants and for large targets, but remained pronounced for PLV when selecting small targets. 

4.1.3 Impact of Walking on Selection. For WalkingTime , we found significant main effects of Technique and Vision (both 𝑝 < .001 ,

𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .22 /.31 ). Participants walked more slowly with finger-based selection than with head- or gaze-based selection ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 =

69 , 𝑝 < .0001 ; 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = −73 , 𝑝 < .001 ; 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 4,

𝑝 = .867 ), and PLV walked more slowly than sighted participants (𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = 118 , 𝑝 < .001 ). For SelectionTimeInWalking , Technique showed a significant main effect ( 𝐹 2,386 = 101 .9, 𝑝 < .001 , 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .35 ), following a pattern con-sistent with that observed for WalkingTime : finger-based selection Chen et al.           

> Figure 4: Mean ConfirmationTime and ReentryTimes across techniques, target sizes, and scenarios. Head-based dwelling remained the most stable across all conditions, whereas finger-based dwelling the least. The advantage of head-based dwelling over gaze was especially pronounced for PLV when selecting small targets. *** denotes 𝑝 <.001 , and ** denotes 𝑝 <.01 .

yielded the slowest performance ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 = 120 , 𝑝 < .001 ;

𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 126 , 𝑝 < .001 ), and no significant difference was found between gaze- and head-based selection ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . 𝑔𝑎𝑧𝑒 −ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 6,

𝑝 = .833 ). No main effect of Vision was found ( 𝑝 = .108 ). A signifi-cant Technique × Vision × Size interaction revealed different size sensitivities across techniques and groups ( 𝐹 2,386 = 4.8, 𝑝 = .009 ,

𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

= .02 ): sighted participants showed no size effect when us-ing gaze-based selection ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −29 , 𝑝 = .915 ), but significant size effects for head- and finger-based selection (head: 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −86 ,

𝑝 < .001 ; finger: 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −97 , 𝑝 < .001 ). In contrast, PLV showed significant size effects with gaze- and finger-based selection (gaze: 

𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −88 , 𝑝 < .001 ; finger: 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −79 , 𝑝 < .001 ), and a marginal effect for head-based selection ( 𝑒𝑠𝑡 . = −60 , 𝑝 = .050 ). 

Interpretations: Although PLV walked more slowly overall, selection imposes comparable performance costs on walking for both PLV and sighted participants. Gaze- and head-based selection achieved comparable high performance for both user groups, while finger-based selection consistently led to lower performance, sug-gesting higher coordination demands during walking. For sighted participants, gaze-based selection remained stable in performance during walking across target sizes. In contrast, PLV showed more sensitivity to target size during walking across all three techniques. 

4.1.4 Subjective Experiences. We report participants’ subjective experiences to explain their statistical performance. We saw a sig-nificant effect of Technique on all subjective measures, including perceived Performance , Effectiveness , Mental Demand , Physical De-mand , and Frustration (all 𝑝 < .001 ), with no effect of Vision (all 

𝑝 ≥ .100 ). While gaze input generally enabled the fastest overall performance statistically (Section 4.1.1), we found that head-based selection was rated to be most successful, effective, least frustrat-ing, followed by gaze-based selection, with finger-based selection being rated the worst (all 𝑝 ≤ .033 ). We elaborate on participants’ experiences below. 

Stability. Head-based selection was frequently described as sta-ble (12/20 PLV; 7/18 sighted) and accurate (6; 10) 2. Finger-based selection was frequently described as unstable (13; 16), particularly over longer distances (3; 1). While instability in gaze dwelling was 

> 2Parenthetical values follow the format (PLV; sighted), with omitted denominators indicating counts out of 20 and 18, respectively.

reported by both groups (13; 12), participants attributed their per-formance to different reasons: more sighted participants reported gaze cursor inaccuracies (6; 14) and attributed them to limitations of the eye-tracking technology (2; 6), whereas more PLV attributed them to their own visual abilities (9; 1). As L05 reflected, “I couldn’t seem to get [the cursor] to stay on the target ... I don’t know if that’s a function of how my eyes work. Do I have nervous eyes?” 

Ease of Control. Consistently, participants described head-based selection as easy to control (17/20 PLV; 16/18 sighted) with minimal physical effort (13; 12). However, some participants noted increased effort from headset weight during head-based selection (2; 2), par-ticularly for higher targets (L02). Perceptions of gaze were mixed (difficult: 8; 7, easy: 7; 9), though most participants (15; 16) reported low physical effort ( 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 ≤ 3). A few participants noted eye fa-tigue during sustained gaze use (1; 4). Finger-based selection was often considered difficult and physically demanding (13; 13). 

Flexibility. Participants reported that gaze-based selection re-quired sustained and focused attention (9/20 PLV; 12/18 sighted), with four PLV noting that this increased attentional demand could raise safety concerns during walking. Dwell-based confirmation may therefore be unsuitable for gaze interaction in mobile contexts (see Section 5.2). In contrast, head-based selection was perceived as requiring less focused attention (6; 6), with finger-based selection generally falling in between. Several participants (L16, L18, S01) further commented that gaze-based selection resulted in a more limited functional field of view compared to head-based selection, constraining flexibility. 

Naturalness. Gaze- and head-based selection were often de-scribed as natural because the cursor aligned with users’ attention (gaze: 11/20 PLV, 13/18 sighted; head: 10, 13). Head-based selection was particularly natural to participants with peripheral vision loss (L02, L17, L18) as it aligned with their original viewing strategy. As L18 noted, he sometimes needed to adjust his head when us-ing gaze-based technique to prevent targets from falling into blind spots, making head-based selection feel more natural. Finger-based selection received mixed evaluations, with similar counts between natural (1; 5) and unnatural (4; 4). L08 and L10 expressed a prefer-ence for directly touching targets rather than pointing with mid-air gestures. Several participants reported that head- and finger-based Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision techniques required an additional refinement step to align the cur-sor, compared to gaze-based selection (head: 5, 6; finger: 9, 10). For real-world usability, gaze- and head-based techniques were appreciated for their discretion (L13, L20, S16), whereas finger-based selection was sometimes perceived as socially awkward (L11, L13) or impractical, particularly for PLV using white canes (L06). 

Cursor challenges for PLV. While no sighted participants re-ported cursor-specific challenges, seven PLV reported that the cur-sor was difficult to track during the dynamic scenario, particularly over long distances (6 PLV) and in visually complex environments (L15). Participants suggested increasing cursor size (L02, L04, L09), brightness (L19), and contrast (L15). However, some (L05, L06) were concerned that overly large cursors might occlude small targets, indicating a trade-off between visibility and precision. Cursor challenges varied across techniques. Four PLV (L06, L09, L16, L17) found the gaze cursor easy to track. L06 found that the gaze cursor helped him focus: “It’s kind of like having a second arm of your eye. When you have that [cursor] there, that’s helping you focus on [the target].” However, L10, who experienced double vision, reported seeing two gaze cursors when not fully focused, which he found distracting. Similarly, five low-vision participants felt the gaze cursor was difficult to track due to stability issues. For head-based selection, four participants (L03, L13, L14, L20) reported that the head cursor was easy to locate, and L10 noted that head movement did not trigger double vision. However, L19 mentioned that the head cursor could still fall into blind spots when the eyes shifted, sharing: “I’d lose the target for a second. But I knew exactly where [the cursor] was because it was responding to my head movement only.” Finger-based cursors were most frequently described as difficult to track (10/20). L15 and L17 observed that while the head cursor generally remained within the visible region of their visual field, the finger cursor often moved into blind spots. Additionally, due to inherent hand instability during mid-air pointing, L06 and L08 de-scribed the cursor movement as “distracting.” As L06 noted, “When your finger even like twitches just a little bit, it kind of throws that off from where you’re trying to look.” 

## 4.2 Impact of Visual Conditions on Selection 

In this section, we report the effects of different low-vision condi-tions (i.e., visual acuity, peripheral vision, central vision) on PLV’s selection performance and experiences. 

4.2.1 Effects of Low-Vision Conditions on Selection Efficiency. We examined the effects of VisualAcuity and PeripheralVision on se-lection efficiency. In the stationary scenario, we found significant effects of Technique × VisualAcuity × PeripheralVision on Selec-tionTime (𝜒 2 (2) = 9.0, 𝑝 = .011 ) and PointingTime (𝜒 2 (2) = 15 .9,

𝑝 < .001 ). LowAcuity significantly increased head- and gaze-based 

SelectionTime (head: 𝑝 = .002 ; gaze: 𝑝 = .020 ) as well as head-based 

PointingTime (𝑝 = .008 ) among participants with SevereFieldLoss ,but no difference was found in the MildFieldLoss group (all 𝑝 ≥ .537 ). Similarly, SevereFieldLoss increased the SelectionTime of all tech-niques (head: 𝑝 = .003 ; gaze: 𝑝 = .017 ; finger: 𝑝 = .043 ) as well as the 

PointingTime of head- and finger-based selection (head: 𝑝 = .009 ;finger: 𝑝 = .028 ) among LowAcuity participants, but no difference was found among HighAcuity participants (all 𝑝 ≥ .319 ). In the dynamic scenario, we found significant effects of Visu-alAcuity × PeripheralVision on SelectionTime and PointingTime 

(𝜒 2 (1) = 11 .7/11 .3, 𝑝 < .001 ), with participants with both LowAcu-ity and SevereFieldLoss exhibiting the longest pointing and overall selection time (all 𝑝 ≤ .015 ). 

Interpretation. These results suggest that reduced visual acuity and peripheral vision loss together produced the greatest selection difficulty. Notably, in the stationary scenario, gaze still showed an advantage at the pointing stage by remaining comparable in performance across low-vision conditions, whereas both head- and finger-based selections were more affected by severe low vision. 

4.2.2 Effects of Low-Vision Conditions on Selection Stability. We examined the effects of VisualAcuity and PeripheralVision on se-lection stability. In the stationary scenario, we found a significant three-way interaction effect of Technique × VisualAcuity × Periph-eralVision on ConfirmationTime (𝜒 2 (2) = 6.8, 𝑝 = .034 ). LowAcu-ity significantly increased confirmation time for participants with 

SevereFieldLoss when using gaze- and head-based dwelling (head: 

𝑝 = .034 ; gaze: 𝑝 = .004 ), but no difference was seen in the Mild-FieldLoss group (all 𝑝 ≥ .506 ). SevereFieldLoss significantly increased 

ConfirmationTime among participants with LowAcuity when using gaze- and head-based dwelling (head: 𝑝 = .028 ; gaze: 𝑝 = .024 ), but no difference was found among the HighAcuity group (all 𝑝 ≥ .405 ). For ReentryTimes , we found a significant effect of VisualAcuity × Pe-ripheralVision (𝜒 2 (1) = 5.0, 𝑝 = .025 ), showing that re-entry times increased only when LowAcuity and SevereFieldLoss co-occurred (LowAcuity : 𝑝 𝑀𝑖𝑙𝑑 −𝑆𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒 = .015 ; SevereFieldLoss : 𝑝 𝐿𝑜𝑤 −𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ = .012 ). In the dynamic scenario, we found significant main effects of both 

VisualAcuity and PeripheralVision on ConfirmationTime (𝜒 2 (1) =

8.2/6.5, 𝑝 = .004 /.011 ). LowAcuity and SevereFieldLoss both in-creased confirmation time ( 𝑝 = .019 /.035 ). For ReentryTimes , no significant effect of PeripheralVision was observed ( 𝑝 = .167 ). How-ever, a significant effect of Technique × VisualAcuity (𝜒 2 (2) = 11 .1,

𝑝 = .004 ) suggested LowAcuity significantly increased ReentryTimes 

for only head-based confirmation ( 𝑝 < .001 ). 

Interpretation. We again found compounded effects of visual constraints in selection stability. However, finger-based confirma-tion in the stationary scenario ( ConfirmationTime ) and gaze- and finger-based confirmation in the dynamic scenario ( ReentryTimes )did not show increased instability under LowAcuity or SevereField-Loss . This may be due to a ceiling effect [ 54 , 90 ], where these tasks were already difficult for PLV regardless of visual ability. 

4.2.3 Unique Preferences of Participants with Central Vision Loss (CVL). Four participants experienced CVL (L13-L15, L20) and relied on their preferred retinal locus (PRL) to view information (Section 3.4). They showed different interaction preferences from other PLV. Unlike most participants who preferred head- or gaze-based selec-tion, L14 and L20 who had both central and peripheral vision loss rated finger-based selection as their preferred technique. L13, L14, and L20 also reported easier control with finger-based interaction. L14 found head-based selection difficult as it required an additional step with CVL: he first needed to locate the target using his PRL and then align the head cursor. In contrast, he perceived finger-based selection as a more direct, single-step interaction. Regarding gaze-based selection, L14 and L15 shared that aligning the gaze cursor with their PRL (Section 3.4) improved eye tracking Chen et al. usability. However, they still needed additional adjustment when controlling the cursor in the PRL (L13–L15) due to the use of mul-tiple PRLs (e.g., when the PRL that contained the cursor was not the one that located the target). L15 noted that gaze use in PRL became more natural with practice: “It just felt more comfortable [after some trials] and I just felt more natural to walk and to gaze.” 

## 5 Discussion 

In this paper, we explored how people with low vision (PLV) per-form with and perceive head-, gaze-, and finger-based selection techniques, and how variations in visual acuity and peripheral vision shape their performance and experiences. We found that for PLV, gaze-based selection enabled the fastest initial pointing when sitting and comparable overall selection time to head-based selection in both scenarios. However, PLV experienced greater dif-ficulty in gaze-based dwelling compared to sighted participants, whereas head-based dwelling remained the most robust across tar-get sizes, scenarios, and visual abilities ( RQ1 ). We also observed a compounded effect of the combination of reduced acuity and restricted field of view on both selection efficiency and stability. Moreover, while finger-based techniques resulted in the lowest performance for all sighted and most low-vision participants, par-ticipants with central vision loss found it useful due to the difficulty of controlling gaze or head cursor with their PRL ( RQ2 ). In this section, we discuss the potential of gaze-based selection for PLV, derive design implications for accessible object selection in AR, and reflect on real-world challenges of AR selection. 

## 5.1 Gaze-Based Selection for Low Vision 

One important contribution of our research is to demonstrate the feasibility and advantage of gaze-based selection for PLV, despite their potential vision and gaze control challenges. These findings highlight the potential of incorporating eye tracking into future selection-based augmentation systems for PLV, offering benefits in pointing efficiency, intuitiveness, and discretion. While prior work has extensively investigated gaze-based techniques for sighted users [ 11 , 44 , 80 , 88 ], our work was the first that focused on people with diverse low-vision conditions. Despite its potential, our findings also reveal practical challenges for PLV in gaze-based selection. First, appropriate calibration sup-port is a prerequisite. With high-contrast, large calibration targets and explicit guidance on target positions [ 92 , 93 ], PLV were able to complete the eye tracking calibration. For users with central vision loss, moving the cursor to their PRL (instead of central vi-sion) enables successful use of gaze-based selection. Although some participants reported initial difficulty controlling the cursor with their PRL, L15 described noticeable improvement with practice (Sec-tion 4.2.3), consistent with prior work that a trained retinal locus can be developed for a specific task [ 70 , 71 , 94 ]. These findings sug-gest that future AR systems should provide customizable, guided calibration interfaces with cursor alignment options, to support accessible gaze-based interaction for PLV. While gaze exhibited faster pointing, gaze-based dwelling showed reduced stability especially for PLV, suggesting a trade-off. One pos-sible explanation is that gaze-based selection directly maps subtle eye movements to the cursor position, making small misalignments more noticeable during interaction. This issue could be more pro-nounced for people with low visual acuity as they spend more visual efforts to identify cursor position and target boundaries. Fu-ture systems should explore gaze smoothing techniques adaptive to low-vision conditions to improve cursor stability. In addition, clearly communicating tracking accuracy and calibration limits may help users better handle misalignment and reduce self-blame. 

## 5.2 Design Implications for Accessible Object Selection in AR 

We discuss potential design implications for future AR systems to support accessible object selection. 

Providing multiple selection options. While sighted partic-ipants and PLV generally shared preferences for head- and gaze-based selection, several participants with both peripheral and cen-tral vision loss favored finger-based selection. This variation sug-gests that no single technique fits all users with diverse visual conditions. Future AR systems should therefore support multiple selection techniques and allow customization. 

Head as the default option for PLV. Across target sizes and task scenarios, head-based selection showed consistently stable performance for PLV. While gaze-based selection demonstrated advantages in certain conditions (e.g., large targets in stationary scenarios), it was less stable in dwelling, was subjectively less pre-ferred among PLV, and required additional calibration. These find-ings suggest that head-based selection can serve as a robust default option for AR object selection, particularly for PLV. 

Reconsidering Dwell-Based Confirmation. Dwell-based trig-gering (i.e., maintaining the cursor stably within a target) poses challenges for PLV in gaze-based interaction. Increased movement in dynamic scenarios (e.g., walking) further perpetuates the sta-bility issue. Future research should explore alternative confirma-tion mechanisms to compensate for the weakness of gaze-based dwelling. Gaze gestures (e.g., directional gaze movements [ 61 ] or leave-and-return patterns [ 33 ]) could be considered but the design should be mindful of PLV’s visual abilities; for example, blinking gestures may not be suitable as some PLV tend to blink more due to eye dryness [ 2, 65 , 78 ]. Other confirmation modalities could also be considered after gaze pointing, such as wristband gestures [ 58 , 85 ]. 

Adaptive Cursor Design. Increased cursor visibility for PLV can support orientation, but the extruded cursor design may ob-struct small objects or affect scene understanding, particularly in gaze- and head-based techniques where the cursor occupies the central field. Future work should explore adaptive cursor design in complex environments, dynamically adjusting size and color based on visual background. Additionally, cursor design could also adapt to user intent to reduce obtrusiveness, which may be inferred from gaze behavior (e.g., searching vs. observing) [ 91 ]. For example, the cursor can remain invisible during pursuit tasks but become visually pronounced for PLV during discrete selection [95]. 

## 5.3 Real-world Selection Challenges 

This work sets a foundation for future selection-based AR aug-mentations for PLV by investigating feasible selection techniques in both stationary and dynamic scenarios. While our initial study was conducted in an ideal controlled lab setting, selection in the Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision real world could be much more complex and challenging. For ex-ample, the environment may contain multiple crowded or even overlapping selectable objects; there could also be various dynamic situations beyond walking, such as sitting on a bus, that further hinder selection. Future systems should explore how to design more accessible selection techniques to overcome these real-world challenges, for example, integrating object augmentation [ 103 ] and distinction techniques [ 49 ] to help distinguish close or overlapping objects before further confirmation, or predicting intended targets in a broader selected area [ 44 ] based on user intent or context. It is also important to investigate when and how systems should in-tervene under ambiguous selection to request explicit clarification without interrupting user flow, particularly in dual-task or fast moving scenarios. Prior work has examined how voice assistants can solicit explicit user feedback [ 99 ], and future research should explore how such design guidelines can be adapted and expanded to support PLV in selection-based AR augmentations. 

## 5.4 Limitations and Future Directions 

Our research has limitations. First, the experimental design was relatively simple and conducted in controlled settings. In real world, object selection may involve visual clutter, low contrast, occlusion, and ambiguous boundaries, which may pose additional challenges for PLV and further affect selection performance and stability. Our future work will design more complex studies to dive deep into these real-world challenges. Second, our work was not a traditional Fitts’ Law study. Instead of rendering standard virtual targets in tightly controlled directions and distances, we focused on selecting real-world objects in AR to reflect more realistic use scenarios. While this design better reflects practical AR use and experiences, it limits direct comparison with classic pointing models and does not allow us to establish a predictive performance model that a Fitts’ Law study typically does. Future work should examine how to refine the study design to develop predictive models for AR object selection while ensuring a reasonable task load for PLV. 

## 6 Conclusion 

We contributed the first study investigating how PLV use head-, gaze-, and finger-based selection techniques for target selection in AR environments. We analyzed selection performance and user experiences between sighted participants and PLV, and across di-verse low-vision conditions. Our results show that PLV achieve the fastest initial pointing with gaze but experience difficulty main-taining gaze-based dwelling stability, whereas head-based selection remains the most robust across visual conditions. We also identify a compounded effect of reduced acuity and restricted field of view on performance. Together, these findings provide empirical insights into suitable AR selection techniques for people with different visual conditions, inspiring future selection-based visual augmentations. 

## References 

[1] Microsoft Build 2026. 2026. Head-gaze and commit - Mixed Reality — learn.microsoft.com. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/design/gaze-and-commit-head. [Accessed 17-03-2026]. [2] Kaleb Abbott, Kara S Hanson, and James Lally. 2024. Prevalence of dry eye disease in the low vision population at the University of Colorado. Journal of Optometry 17, 2 (2024), 100501. [3] Yuki Abe, Keisuke Matsushima, Kotaro Hara, Daisuke Sakamoto, and Tetsuo Ono. 2025. “I can run at night!": Using Augmented Reality to Support Night-time Guided Running for Low-vision Runners. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. [4] Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Hossein Ameri, Debbie Mitra, and Mark Humayun. 2019. Enhanced depth navigation through augmented reality depth mapping in patients with low vision. Scientific reports 9, 1 (2019), 11230. [5] Mihai Bâce, Teemu Leppänen, David Gil De Gomez, and Argenis Ramirez Gomez. 2016. ubiGaze: ubiquitous augmented reality messaging using gaze gestures. In 

SIGGRAPH ASIA 2016 Mobile Graphics and Interactive Applications . 1–5. [6] Chris Baumann and Kai Dierkes. 2023. Neon accuracy test report. Pupil Labs 10 (2023). [7] Ana M Bernardos, David Gómez, and José R Casar. 2016. A comparison of head pose and deictic pointing interaction methods for smart environments. 

International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 32, 4 (2016), 325–351. [8] Jonas Blattgerste, Patrick Renner, and Thies Pfeiffer. 2018. Advantages of eye-gaze over head-gaze-based selection in virtual and augmented reality under varying field of views. In Proceedings of the workshop on communication by gaze interaction . 1–9. [9] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. 

Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101. [10] Norman E Breslow and David G Clayton. 1993. Approximate inference in generalized linear mixed models. Journal of the American statistical Association 

88, 421 (1993), 9–25. [11] Di Laura Chen, Marcello Giordano, Hrvoje Benko, Tovi Grossman, and Stephanie Santosa. 2023. Gazeraycursor: Facilitating virtual reality target selection by blending gaze and controller raycasting. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Sympo-sium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology . 1–11. [12] Ruijia Chen, Junru Jiang, Pragati Maheshwary, Brianna R Cochran, and Yuhang Zhao. 2025. VisiMark: Characterizing and Augmenting Landmarks for People with Low Vision in Augmented Reality to Support Indoor Navigation. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–20. [13] Xiuli Chen, Aditya Acharya, Antti Oulasvirta, and Andrew Howes. 2021. An adaptive model of gaze-based selection. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–11. [14] Victoria Clarke and Virginia Braun. 2017. Thematic analysis. The journal of positive psychology 12, 3 (2017), 297–298. [15] Jacob Cohen. 2013. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . rout-ledge. [16] Nathan Cournia, John D Smith, and Andrew T Duchowski. 2003. Gaze-vs. hand-based pointing in virtual environments. In CHI’03 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . 772–773. [17] Michael D Crossland, Louise E Culham, Stamatina A Kabanarou, and Gary S Rubin. 2005. Preferred retinal locus development in patients with macular disease. Ophthalmology 112, 9 (2005), 1579–1585. [18] Heiko Drewes, Mohamed Khamis, and Florian Alt. 2019. Dialplates: Enabling pursuits-based user interfaces with large target numbers. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia . 1–10. [19] Augusto Esteves, Yonghwan Shin, and Ian Oakley. 2020. Comparing selection mechanisms for gaze input techniques in head-mounted displays. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 139 (2020), 102414. [20] Augusto Esteves, Eduardo Velloso, Andreas Bulling, and Hans Gellersen. 2015. Orbits: Gaze interaction for smart watches using smooth pursuit eye movements. In Proceedings of the 28th annual ACM symposium on user interface software & technology . 457–466. [21] Jacqui Fashimpaur, Kenrick Kin, and Matt Longest. 2020. Pinchtype: Text entry for virtual and augmented reality using comfortable thumb to fingertip pinches. In Extended abstracts of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–7. [22] Federal Highway Administration. 2003. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), Part 4E: Pedestrian Control Features. https://mutcd.fhwa. dot.gov/HTM/2003/part4/part4e.htm. U.S. Department of Transportation. [23] Frederick L Ferris III, Aaron Kassoff, George H Bresnick, and Ian Bailey. 1982. New visual acuity charts for clinical research. American journal of ophthalmology 

94, 1 (1982), 91–96. [24] American Foundation for the Blind. 2026. Low Vision and Legal Blindness Terms and Descriptions — afb.org. https://afb.org/blindness-and-low-vision/eye-conditions/low-vision-and-legal-blindness-terms-and-descriptions. [Accessed 27-03-2026]. [25] Dylan R Fox, Ahmad Ahmadzada, Clara T Friedman, Shiri Azenkot, Marlena A Chu, Roberto Manduchi, and Emily A Cooper. 2023. Using augmented reality to cue obstacles for people with low vision. Optics Express 31, 4 (2023), 6827–6848. [26] Andrzej Gałecki and Tomasz Burzykowski. 2012. Linear mixed-effects model. In 

Linear mixed-effects models using R: a step-by-step approach . Springer, 245–273. [27] Despoina Gavgiotaki, Stavroula Ntoa, George Margetis, Konstantinos C Apos-tolakis, and Constantine Stephanidis. 2023. Gesture-based interaction for AR systems: a short review. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Chen et al. 

PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments . 284–292. [28] Sandra G Hart and Lowell E Staveland. 1988. Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. In Advances in psychology . Vol. 52. Elsevier, 139–183. [29] Jaylin Herskovitz, Andi Xu, Rahaf Alharbi, and Anhong Guo. 2023. Hacking, switching, combining: understanding and supporting DIY assistive technology design by blind people. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–17. [30] Meta Horizon. 2026. Head — developers.meta.com. https://developers.meta. com/horizon/design/head. [Accessed 17-03-2026]. [31] Jonathan Huang, Max Kinateder, Matt J Dunn, Wojciech Jarosz, Xing-Dong Yang, and Emily A Cooper. 2019. An augmented reality sign-reading assistant for users with reduced vision. PloS one 14, 1 (2019), e0210630. [32] Alex D Hwang and Eli Peli. 2014. An augmented-reality edge enhancement application for Google Glass. Optometry and vision science 91, 8 (2014), 1021– 1030. [33] Aulikki Hyrskykari, Howell Istance, and Stephen Vickers. 2012. Gaze gestures or dwell-based interaction?. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications . 229–232. [34] Apple Inc. 2026. Magnify or describe things around you with Magnifier on iPhone — support.apple.com. https://support.apple.com/guide/iphone/magnify-or-describe-things-around-you-iphe867dc99c/ios. [Accessed 17-03-2026]. [35] Apple Inc. 2026. Use a pointer to navigate your Apple Vision Pro. https://support.apple.com/guide/apple-vision-pro/use-a-pointer-to-navigate-tan3869c8a85/visionos. [Accessed 17-03-2026]. [36] Robert JK Jacob. 1990. What you look at is what you get: eye movement-based interaction techniques. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 11–18. [37] Shahram Jalaliniya, Diako Mardanbeigi, Thomas Pederson, and Dan Witzner Hansen. 2014. Head and eye movement as pointing modalities for eyewear computers. In 2014 11th International Conference on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks Workshops . IEEE, 50–53. [38] Jaejoon Jeong, Soo-Hyung Kim, Hyung-Jeong Yang, Gun A Lee, and Seungwon Kim. 2023. GazeHand: A gaze-driven virtual hand interface. IEEE Access 11 (2023), 133703–133716. [39] Jiaqi Jiang, Xiaolong Zhou, Sixian Chan, and Shengyong Chen. 2019. Appearance-based gaze tracking: A brief review. In International Conference on Intelligent Robotics and Applications . Springer, 629–640. [40] Glenn Jocher, Ayush Chaurasia, and Jing Qiu. 2023. Ultralytics YOLOv8 . https: //github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics [41] Shaun K Kane, Chandrika Jayant, Jacob O Wobbrock, and Richard E Ladner. 2009. Freedom to roam: a study of mobile device adoption and accessibility for people with visual and motor disabilities. In Proceedings of the 11th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility . 115–122. [42] Cem Kaya, Baha Mert Ersoy, and Murat Karaca. 2024. Virtual reality meets low vision: the development and analysis of MagniVR as an assistive technology. In 

International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction . Springer, 321–333. [43] Robert Kerr and Muhammad Marwan Muhammad Fuad. 2019. A real-time lazy eye correction method for low cost webcams. Procedia Computer Science 159 (2019), 281–290. [44] Jinwook Kim, Sangmin Park, Qiushi Zhou, Mar Gonzalez-Franco, Jeongmi Lee, and Ken Pfeuffer. 2025. PinchCatcher: Enabling Multi-selection for Gaze+ Pinch. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–16. [45] Mikko Kytö, Barrett Ens, Thammathip Piumsomboon, Gun A Lee, and Mark Billinghurst. 2018. Pinpointing: Precise head-and eye-based target selection for augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–14. [46] Pupil Labs. 2026. Neon - Overview - Eye tracking for research and beyond — pupil-labs.com. https://pupil-labs.com/products/neon. [Accessed 19-03-2026]. [47] Pupil Labs. 2026. Neon - Using Offset Correction to Improve Gaze Accuracy -Pupil Labs Docs — docs.pupil-labs.com. https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/data-collection/offset-correction/. [Accessed 31-03-2026]. [48] Jaewook Lee, Yang Li, Dylan Bunarto, Eujean Lee, Olivia H Wang, Adrian Rodriguez, Yuhang Zhao, Yapeng Tian, and Jon E Froehlich. 2024. Towards AI-Powered AR for Enhancing Sports Playability for People with Low Vision: An Exploration of ARSports. In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct) . IEEE, 228–233. [49] Jaewook Lee, Andrew D Tjahjadi, Jiho Kim, Junpu Yu, Minji Park, Jiawen Zhang, Jon E Froehlich, Yapeng Tian, and Yuhang Zhao. 2024. CookAR: Affordance augmentations in wearable AR to support kitchen tool interactions for people with low vision. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1–16. [50] Hong Lei and Ronald A Schuchard. 1997. Using two preferred retinal loci for different lighting conditions in patients with central scotomas. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science 38, 9 (1997), 1812–1818. [51] Chen Li, Xia Zhang, Wei Li, and Yafei Liu. 2025. Effects of Dwell Time and Area on Task Performance of Gaze-Triggered Eye Control in AR-Aided Aircraft Cockpits. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction (2025), 1–8. [52] Chiuhsiang Joe Lin, Sui-Hua Ho, and Yan-Jyun Chen. 2015. An investigation of pointing postures in a 3D stereoscopic environment. Applied ergonomics 48 (2015), 154–163. [53] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. 2015. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. arXiv:1405.0312 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312 [54] Qimin Liu and Lijuan Wang. 2021. t-Test and ANOVA for data with ceiling and/or floor effects. Behavior Research Methods 53, 1 (2021), 264–277. [55] Mathias N Lystbæk, Peter Rosenberg, Ken Pfeuffer, Jens Emil Grønbæk, and Hans Gellersen. 2022. Gaze-hand alignment: Combining eye gaze and mid-air pointing for interacting with menus in augmented reality. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6, ETRA (2022), 1–18. [56] Sina Masnadi, Brian Williamson, Andrés N Vargas González, and Joseph J LaViola. 2020. Vriassist: An eye-tracked virtual reality low vision assistance tool. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW) . IEEE, 808–809. [57] Natalie Maus, Dalton Rutledge, Sedeeq Al-Khazraji, Reynold Bailey, Cecilia Oves-dotter Alm, and Kristen Shinohara. 2020. Gaze-guided magnification for individ-uals with vision impairments. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–8. [58] Meta. 2026. EMG Wristbands and Technology | Meta — meta.com. https://www.meta.com/emerging-tech/emg-wearable-technology/?srsltid= AfmBOoqpQdYtnEolu9uYJfW4yEj5pSvi9ODVydniiwHdnPH4tvboUVrP. [Accessed 26-03-2026]. [59] Meta Platforms, Inc. 2024. Unity Spatial Anchors Best Practices .https://developers.meta.com/horizon/documentation/unity/unity-spatial-anchors-best-practices/ Accessed: 2026-01-25. [60] Katsumi Minakata, John Paulin Hansen, I Scott MacKenzie, Per Bækgaard, and Vijay Rajanna. 2019. Pointing by gaze, head, and foot in a head-mounted display. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM symposium on eye tracking research & applications .1–9. [61] Pallavi Mohan, Wooi Boon Goh, Chi-Wing Fu, and Sai-Kit Yeung. 2018. Dual-Gaze: Addressing the midas touch problem in gaze mediated VR interaction. In 

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct) . IEEE, 79–84. [62] Howard Moshtael, Tariq Aslam, Ian Underwood, and Baljean Dhillon. 2015. High tech aids low vision: a review of image processing for the visually impaired. 

Translational vision science & technology 4, 4 (2015), 6–6. [63] Jens Müller, Roman Rädle, and Harald Reiterer. 2017. Remote collaboration with mixed reality displays: How shared virtual landmarks facilitate spatial referencing. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 6481–6486. [64] Aunnoy K Mutasim, Anil Ufuk Batmaz, and Wolfgang Stuerzlinger. 2021. Pinch, click, or dwell: Comparing different selection techniques for eye-gaze-based pointing in virtual reality. In Acm symposium on eye tracking research and applications . 1–7. [65] Katsu Nakamori, Mikiko Odawara, Toshiaki Nakajima, Taku Mizutani, and Kazuo Tsubota. 1997. Blinking is controlled primarily by ocular surface condi-tions. American journal of ophthalmology 124, 1 (1997), 24–30. [66] Omar Namnakani, Yasmeen Abdrabou, Jonathan Grizou, Augusto Esteves, and Mohamed Khamis. 2023. Comparing dwell time, pursuits and gaze gestures for gaze interaction on handheld mobile devices. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–17. [67] National Eye Institute. 2024. Low Vision . U.S. National Institutes of Health. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-conditions-and-diseases/low-vision Accessed: 2025-11-02. [68] Gerhard Neuhold, Tobias Ollmann, Samuel Rota Bulo, and Peter Kontschieder. 2017. The mapillary vistas dataset for semantic understanding of street scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision . 4990–4999. [69] Richard Nguyen, Charles Gouin-Vallerand, and Maryam Amiri. 2023. Hand interaction designs in mixed and augmented reality head mounted display: a scoping review and classification. Frontiers in Virtual Reality 4 (2023), 1171230. [70] ULLA L NILSSON, CHRISTINA FRENNESSON, and SVEN ERIK G NILSSON. 1998. Location and stability of a newly established eccentric retinal locus suitable for reading, achieved through training of patients with a dense central scotoma. 

Optometry and Vision Science 75, 12 (1998), 873–878. [71] Ayşe Bozkurt Oflaz, Banu Turgut Öztürk, Şaban Gönül, Berker Bakbak, Şansal Gedik, and Süleyman Okudan. 2022. Short-term clinical results of preferred retinal locus training. Turk J Ophthalmol 52, 1 (2022), 14–22. [72] Joyojeet Pal, Anandhi Viswanathan, Priyank Chandra, Anisha Nazareth, Vaish-nav Kameswaran, Hariharan Subramonyam, Aditya Johri, Mark S Ackerman, and Sile O’Modhrain. 2017. Agency in assistive technology adoption: visual impairment and smartphone use in Bangalore. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 5929–5940. [73] Yesaya Tommy Paulus and Gerard Bastiaan Remijn. 2021. Usability of various dwell times for eye-gaze-based object selection with eye tracking. Displays 67 Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision 

(2021), 101997. [74] Thierry Pozzo, Paul J Stapley, and Charalambos Papaxanthis. 2002. Coordina-tion between equilibrium and hand trajectories during whole body pointing movements. Experimental Brain Research 144, 3 (2002), 343–350. [75] Pupil Labs. 2024. Pupil Labs Fixation Detector: Algorithm Descrip-tion. https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CZnjyg4P83QSkfHi_ bjwSceWCTWvlVtbGWtuyajv5Jc/export?format=pdf Accessed: 2026-02-10. [76] Yuan Yuan Qian and Robert J Teather. 2017. The eyes don’t have it: an em-pirical comparison of head-based and eye-based selection in virtual reality. In 

Proceedings of the 5th symposium on spatial user interaction . 91–98. [77] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2022. Whisper. https://github.com/openai/whisper. OpenAI, Automatic Speech Recognition System. [78] Effie Z Rahman, Peter K Lam, Chia-Kai Chu, Quianta Moore, and Stephen C Pflugfelder. 2015. Corneal sensitivity in tear dysfunction and its correlation with clinical parameters and blink rate. American journal of ophthalmology 160, 5 (2015), 858–866. [79] John TE Richardson. 2018. The use of Latin-square designs in educational and psychological research. Educational Research Review 24 (2018), 84–97. [80] Rongkai Shi, Yushi Wei, Xueying Qin, Pan Hui, and Hai-Ning Liang. 2023. Exploring gaze-assisted and hand-based region selection in augmented reality. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 7, ETRA (2023), 1–19. [81] Ludwig Sidenmark, Zibo Sun, and Hans Gellersen. 2024. Cone&Bubble: Evalu-ating Combinations of Gaze, Head and Hand Pointing for Target Selection in Dense 3D Environments. In 2024 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW) . IEEE, 642–649. [82] Michael J Simpson. 2017. Mini-review: Far peripheral vision. Vision research 

140 (2017), 96–105. [83] Lee Stearns, Victor DeSouza, Jessica Yin, Leah Findlater, and Jon E Froehlich. 2017. Augmented reality magnification for low vision users with the microsoft hololens and a finger-worn camera. In Proceedings of the 19th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . 361–362. [84] Lee Stearns, Leah Findlater, and Jon E Froehlich. 2018. Design of an augmented reality magnification aid for low vision users. In Proceedings of the 20th interna-tional ACM SIGACCESS conference on computers and accessibility . 28–39. [85] Hoang Truong, Shuo Zhang, Ufuk Muncuk, Phuc Nguyen, Nam Bui, Anh Nguyen, Qin Lv, Kaushik Chowdhury, Thang Dinh, and Tam Vu. 2018. Cap-band: Battery-free successive capacitance sensing wristband for hand gesture recognition. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems . 54–67. [86] Theophanis Tsandilas and Géry Casiez. 2024. The illusory promise of the Aligned Rank Transform—A systematic study of rank transformations. [87] Eduardo Velloso, Marcus Carter, Joshua Newn, Augusto Esteves, Christopher Clarke, and Hans Gellersen. 2017. Motion correlation: Selecting objects by matching their movement. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 24, 3 (2017), 1–35. [88] Uta Wagner, Matthias Albrecht, Andreas Asferg Jacobsen, Haopeng Wang, Hans Gellersen, and Ken Pfeuffer. 2024. Gaze, wall, and racket: Combining gaze and hand-controlled plane for 3D selection in virtual reality. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 8, ISS (2024), 189–213. [89] Uta Wagner, Mathias N Lystbæk, Pavel Manakhov, Jens Emil Sloth Grønbæk, Ken Pfeuffer, and Hans Gellersen. 2023. A fitts’ law study of gaze-hand alignment for selection in 3d user interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–15. [90] Lijuan Wang, Zhiyong Zhang, John J McArdle, and Timothy A Salthouse. 2008. Investigating ceiling effects in longitudinal data analysis. Multivariate behavioral research 43, 3 (2008), 476–496. [91] Ru Wang, Ruijia Chen, Anqiao Erica Cai, Zhiyuan Li, Sanbrita Mondal, and Yuhang Zhao. 2025. Characterizing Visual Intents for People with Low Vision through Eye Tracking. In Proceedings of the 27th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . 1–18. [92] Ru Wang, Zach Potter, Yun Ho, Daniel Killough, Linxiu Zeng, Sanbrita Mondal, and Yuhang Zhao. 2024. GazePrompt: Enhancing Low Vision People’s Reading Experience with Gaze-Aware Augmentations. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–17. [93] Ru Wang, Linxiu Zeng, Xinyong Zhang, Sanbrita Mondal, and Yuhang Zhao. 2023. Understanding how low vision people read using eye tracking. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–17. [94] Gale R Watson, Ronald A Schuchard, William R De l’Aune, and Erica Watkins. 2006. Effects of preferred retinal locus placement on text navigation and devel-opment of advantageous trained retinal locus. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development 43, 6 (2006), 761. [95] Yushi Wei, Rongkai Shi, Sen Zhang, Anil Ufuk Batmaz, Pan Hui, and Hai-Ning Liang. 2025. Reevaluating the Gaze Cursor in Virtual Reality: A Comparative Analysis of Cursor Visibility, Confirmation Mechanisms, and Task Paradigms. 

IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2025). [96] James Whiffing, Tobias Langlotz, Christof Lutteroth, Adwait Sharma, and Christopher Clarke. 2026. Understanding Freehand Cursorless Pointing Variabil-ity and Its Impact on Selection Performance. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 33, 1 (2026), 1–47. [97] Stephen G Whittaker, James Budd, and RW Cummings. 1988. Eccentric fixation with macular scotoma. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science 29, 2 (1988), 268–278. [98] Jacob O Wobbrock, Leah Findlater, Darren Gergle, and James J Higgins. 2011. The aligned rank transform for nonparametric factorial analyses using only anova procedures. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 143–146. [99] Ziang Xiao, Sarah Mennicken, Bernd Huber, Adam Shonkoff, and Jennifer Thom. 2021. Let me ask you this: How can a voice assistant elicit explicit user feedback? 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW2 (2021), 1–24. [100] Wenge Xu, Hai-Ning Liang, Anqi He, and Zifan Wang. 2019. Pointing and selection methods for text entry in augmented reality head mounted displays. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) .IEEE, 279–288. [101] Yuhang Zhao, Elizabeth Kupferstein, Hathaitorn Rojnirun, Leah Findlater, and Shiri Azenkot. 2020. The effectiveness of visual and audio wayfinding guidance on smartglasses for people with low vision. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–14. [102] Yuhang Zhao, Sarit Szpiro, and Shiri Azenkot. 2015. Foresee: A customizable head-mounted vision enhancement system for people with low vision. In Pro-ceedings of the 17th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on computers & accessibility . 239–249. [103] Yuhang Zhao, Sarit Szpiro, Jonathan Knighten, and Shiri Azenkot. 2016. CueSee: exploring visual cues for people with low vision to facilitate a visual search task. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . 73–84. [104] Yuhang Zhao, Sarit Szpiro, Lei Shi, and Shiri Azenkot. 2019. Designing and evaluating a customizable head-mounted vision enhancement system for people with low vision. ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing (TACCESS) 12, 4 (2019), 1–46. Chen et al. 

## A Demographic Information of Low Vision Participants 

ID Age/ Gender Diagnosis Legally Blind Visual Acuity (After Correction) Low v.s. High Acuity Field of View (FOV) Severe v.s. Mild Peripheral Vision Loss Prior AR Experi-ences Dominant Hand 

L01 59/M Optical neuropathy Y R: 20/300; L:20/70 High Acuity Less than 20 ° Severe Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L02 23/Non-binary Unsure N R: 20/80; L:20/80 High Acuity ∼60 ° Severe Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L03 62/M Birth defect N R: <20/400; L:20/50 High Acuity Intact Mild Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L04 57/F Macular degeneration N R: 20/320; L:20/125 Low Acuity Intact Mild Peripheral Field Loss Y Left L05 67/M Sleep apnea with suspected optic nerve impact N R: 20/60; L:20/15 High Acuity Reported two-thirds of the lower vision loss in right eye; passed all visual field test points Mild Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L06 41/M Central scotoma Y R: 20/200; L: 20/200 Low Acuity Intact Mild Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L07 59/F Central scotoma in the right eye N R: 20/40; L: 20/30 High Acuity Reported scotoma; passed all visual field test points Mild Peripheral Field Loss N Right L08 19/M Stargardts N R: 20/160; L: 20/250 Low Acuity Intact Mild Peripheral Field Loss N Right L09 58/F Retinitis pigmentosa Y R: 20/80; L: 20/60 High Acuity ∼10 ° Severe Peripheral Field Loss N Right L10 29/M Stargardts N R: 20/100; L: 20/100 Low Acuity Intact Mild Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L11 72/F Macular degeneration; chemotherapy-induced neurological corneal issues N R: 20/150; L: 20/200 Low Acuity Intact Mild Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L12 78/F Glaucoma in both eyes; ICE syndrome in right eye N R: 20/160; L: 20/30 High Acuity Reported peripheral vision loss in the right eye ( ∼90 °); passed all visual field test points Mild Peripheral Field Loss N Right L13 50/M Macular degeneration (Best disease) Y R: 20/600–20/800; L: 20/400 Low Acuity Central scotomas Mild Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L14 81/M Corneal dystrophy Y R: <20/400; L:< 20/400 Low Acuity Central scotomas and peripheral field loss in the upper and left visual fields (less than 50 ° remaining) Severe Peripheral Field Loss N Right L15 74/M Stargardts Y R: <20/400; L: <20/400 Low Acuity Central scotomas Mild Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L16 42/M Retinitis pigmentosa Y R: 20/40; L: 20/30 High Acuity ∼15 ° Severe Peripheral Field Loss Y Right L17 64/F Glaucoma; cataract N R: 20/60; L: 20/60 High Acuity ∼40 ° Severe Peripheral Field Loss N Left L18 77/M Glaucoma in the right eye; fluid behind the retina in the left eye, resulting in blindness N R: 20/125; L: <20/400 Low Acuity Left eye blindness with scotomas in the right eye Severe Peripheral Field Loss N Right L19 91/F Glaucoma; macular degeneration N R: <20/400, L: 20/200 Low Acuity Intact Mild Peripheral Field Loss N Right L20 70/F Stargardts Y R: 20/600; L: 20/600 Low Acuity Central scotomas, peripheral vision loss in the upper visual field, peripheral scotomas Severe Peripheral Field Loss Y Right 

Table 1: Demographic information of participants with low vision. Low and high acuity were classified based on a 20/100 visual acuity threshold in the better eye. Severe Peripheral Field Loss here denotes peripheral vision loss with a visual field narrower than 60 °, and Mild Peripheral Field Loss denotes mild to no peripheral vision loss with a visual field wider than 60 °. Legally blind refers to best-corrected visual acuity worse than 20/200 in the better eye or a visual field narrower than 20 °.

## B Demographic Information of Sighted Participants 

ID Age/ Gender Prior AR Experiences Dominant Hand 

S01 20/F Y Right S02 27/F Y Right S03 59/F N Right S04 49/M N Right S05 23/M Y Right S06 24/F N Right S07 27/F N Right S08 26/F N Right S09 44/M Y Right S10 22/F Y Right S11 57/F N Right S12 45/F Y Right S13 21/M Y Right S14 73/F N Left S15 26/F Y Left S16 41/M Y Left S17 26/M N Right S18 40/M Y Left 

Table 2: Demographic information of sighted participants. Head, Gaze, or Finger? Comparing Object Selection Techniques in Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision 

## C Statistical Results for Comparing Selection Behavior Between PLV and Sighted Participants 

Task Measure Parameter F P-value 𝜂 2

> 𝑝

Static 

SelectionTime Technique 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 233 .2 *** 0.22 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 30 .5 *** 0.47 †

Size 𝐹 (1, 1682 ) = 284 .8 *** 0.14 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 40 .2 *** 0.05 

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 48 .1 *** 0.05 

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 1682 ) = 29 .7 *** 0.02 

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 6.2 ** <0.01 

PointingTime Technique 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 206 .1 *** 0.20 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 28 .3 *** 0.45 †

Size 𝐹 (1, 1682 ) = 149 .7 *** 0.08 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 26 .9 *** 0.03 

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 15 .7 *** 0.02 

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 1682 ) = 4.3 * <0.01 

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 0.2 0.809 –

ConfirmationTime Technique 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 85 .9 *** 0.09 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 24 .6 *** 0.42 †

Size 𝐹 (1, 1682 ) = 214 .1 *** 0.11 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 58 .8 *** 0.07 †

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 88 .8 *** 0.10 †

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 1682 ) = 53 .1 *** 0.03 

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 88 .8 *** 0.10 †

ReentryTimes Technique 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 113 .7 *** 0.12 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 15 .9 *** 0.32 †

Size 𝐹 (1, 1682 ) = 65 .6 *** 0.04 

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 20 .0 *** 0.02 

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 23 .6 *** 0.03 

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 1682 ) = 124 .1 *** 0.07 †

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 1682 ) = 74 .4 *** 0.08 †

Dynamic 

SelectionTime Technique 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 108 .5 *** 0.36 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 15 .5 *** 0.31 †

Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 178 .0 *** 0.32 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 1.2 0.316 –

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 19 .0 *** 0.09 †

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 10 .9 ** 0.03 

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 3.3 * 0.02 

PointingTime Technique 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 60 .0 *** 0.24 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 28 .7 *** 0.46 †

Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 106 .9 *** 0.22 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 8.5 *** 0.04 

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 11 .9 *** 0.06 †

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 30 .1 *** 0.07 †

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 3.0 * 0.02 

ConfirmationTime Technique 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 73 .9 *** 0.28 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 0.3 0.584 –

Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 81 .5 *** 0.17 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 10 .3 *** 0.05 

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 15 .5 *** 0.07 †

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 1.1 0.305 –

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 10 .7 *** 0.05 

ReentryTimes Technique 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 86 .6 *** 0.31 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 2.0 0.168 –

Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 97 .1 *** 0.20 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 10 .6 *** 0.05 

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 17 .1 *** 0.08 †

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 0.1 0.824 –

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 5.3 ** 0.03 

WalkingTime Technique 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 54 .9 *** 0.22 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 15 .4 *** 0.31 †

Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 146 .6 *** 0.28 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 1.2 0.295 –

Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 13 .9 *** 0.07 †

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 3.4 0.066 <0.01 

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 0.2 0.820 –

SelectionTiming Technique 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 101 .9 *** 0.35 †

Vision 𝐹 (1, 34 ) = 2.7 0.108 –

Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 105 .8 *** 0.22 †

Technique x Vision 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 5.0 ** 0.03 

InWalking Technique x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 5.3 ** 0.03 

Vision x Size 𝐹 (1, 386 ) = 0.5 0.474 –

Technique x Vision x Size 𝐹 (2, 386 ) = 4.8 ** 0.02 

Table 3: Statistical results for comparing selection behavior between low vision and sighted participants. Significant codes: *** 𝑝 < .001 , ** 𝑝 < .01 , * 𝑝 < .05 .

†indicates effect size reached at least a medium level ( 𝜂 2 

> 𝑝

≥ 0.06 ). Chen et al. 

## D Statistical Effects of Visual Ability on Selection Behavior 

Task Measure Parameter F P-value 

Static 

SelectionTime (Intercept) 𝜒 2 (1) = 239 .0 *** 

Technique 𝜒 2 (2) = 125 .5 *** 

VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (1) = 6.8 ** 

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 6.0 *

Technique x VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.4 0.495 

Technique x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 4.3 0.118 

VisualAcuity x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 5.7 *

Technique x VisualAcuity x

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 9.0 *

PointingTime (Intercept) 𝜒 2 (1) = 0.5 0.471 

Technique 𝜒 2 (2) = 151 .7 *** 

VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (1) = 3.1 0.079 

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 2.8 0.094 

Technique x VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (2) = 5.6 0.062 

Technique x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 8.2 *

VisualAcuity x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 3.3 0.071 

Technique x VisualAcuity x

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 15 .9 *** 

ConfirmationTime (Intercept) 𝜒 2 (1) = 3.4 0.065 

Technique 𝜒 2 (2) = 28 .5 *** 

VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (1) = 5.2 *

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 3.3 0.071 

Technique x VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (2) = 3.8 0.150 

Technique x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 0.6 0.747 

VisualAcuity x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 3.2 0.074 

Technique x VisualAcuity x

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 6.8 *

ReentryTimes (Intercept) 𝜒 2 (1) = 57 .7 *** 

Technique 𝜒 2 (2) = 51 .1 *** 

VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (1) = 2.9 0.089 

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 1.6 0.208 

Technique x VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.2 0.550 

Technique x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.8 0.406 

VisualAcuity x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 5.0 *

Technique x VisualAcuity x

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 5.5 0.065 Dynamic 

SelectionTime (Intercept) 𝜒 2 (1) = 428 .1 *** 

Technique 𝜒 2 (2) = 34 .5 *** 

VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (1) = 11 .9 *** 

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 22 .6 *** 

Technique x VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (2) = 6.8 *

Technique x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 2.4 0.307 

VisualAcuity x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 11 .7 *** 

Technique x VisualAcuity x

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 9.0 *

PointingTime (Intercept) 𝜒 2 (1) = 83 .1 *** 

Technique 𝜒 2 (2) = 10 .5 ** 

VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (1) = 7.0 ** 

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 16 .7 *** 

Technique x VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (2) = 4.2 0.133 

Technique x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.4 0.496 

VisualAcuity x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 11 .3 *** 

Technique x VisualAcuity x

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 3.3 0.194 

ConfirmationTime (Intercept) 𝜒 2 (1) = 52 .7 *** 

Technique 𝜒 2 (2) = 42 .1 *** 

VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (1) = 8.2 ** 

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 6.5 *

Technique x VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.5 0.479 

Technique x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.0 0.607 

VisualAcuity x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 2.6 0.109 

Technique x VisualAcuity x

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.9 0.378 

ReentryTimes (Intercept) 𝜒 2 (1) = 1.7 0.193 

Technique 𝜒 2 (2) = 42 .2 *** 

VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (1) = 7.5 ** 

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 1.9 0.167 

Technique x VisualAcuity 𝜒 2 (2) = 11 .1 ** 

Technique x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.5 0.466 

VisualAcuity x PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (1) = 0.6 0.436 

Technique x VisualAcuity x

PeripheralVision 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.0 0.621 

Table 4: Statistical results for comparing selection behavior among low vision participants with different visual abilities. Significant codes: *** 𝑝 < .001 , ** 𝑝 < .01 , * 

𝑝 < .05 .