Title: Distinct Computational and Temporal Mechanisms Underlie the Joint Effects of Motivation and Working Memory on Perceptual Sensitivity

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
1

# Distinct Computational and Temporal Mechanisms 

# Underlie the Joint Effects of Motivation and Working 

# Memory on Perceptual Sensitivity 

Gargi Bhattacharjee 1,* , Shilpa Dang 1,*  

> 1

Network & Cognitive Neuroscience Lab, Centre for Br ai n Science & Applications, School of Artificial 

Intelligence & Data Science, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India 

* Corresponding author: sdang@iitj.ac.in 

Short title:  Motivational and Working Memory Modulation of Perception 

Number of total pages: 35 

Number of main pages: 31

Number of main figures: 4

Number of supplementary pages: 4

Number of supplementary figures: 1

Number of supplementary tables: 4 

Conflict of Interests Statement : The authors declare no competing interests. 

Authors’ Contributions : GB and SD conceptualized the project and designed the task. GB conducted 

the experiments, preprocessed and analyzed the data. GB and SD interpreted the results . GB wrote 

the first draft of the manuscript. All authors revised the manuscript. 

Data and Code Availability:  The data and custom code that support the findings of this study are 

available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

# Abstract 

Human perception is continuously shaped by internal cognitive states, yet how motivation and 

working memory jointly influence perceptual sensitivity remains poorly understood. Here, we 

combined behavioural experiments, computational modelling, and pupillom etry to determine 

whether motivation enhances perception by amplifying working memory (WM) -driven facilitation or 

whether both exert independent influences. Participants performed a near -threshold visuospatial 

discrimination task under systematically manip ulated motivational and WM states. Behaviourally, 

both motivation and WM independently improved perceptual performance, producing the greatest 

enhancement when both were present. A Bayesian  generalized linear  psychometric model revealed 

that these improvements were best explained by independent additive contributions to effective 

perceptual sensitivity, rather than motivational amplification of WM. Consistent with this 

computational framework, pupil dynamics tr acked trial -by -trial fluctuations in effective perceptual 

sensitivity while revealing temporally dissociable influences of WM and motivation during perceptual 

decision making. Together, our findings demonstrate that the joint effects of motivation and work ing 

memory arise from distinct computational and temporal mechanisms, providing a unified framework 

for understanding top -down regulation of human perception. 

Keywords - Perceptual sensitivity, Working memory, Motivation, Computational modelling, 

Pupillometry 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

# Introduction 

On a busy street, while navigating through dense traffic, one can instantly detect a friend they are 

looking to meet. Likewise, a student scanning an exam sheet often becomes more precise in identifying 

relevant information under time pressure and motivati on to perform well. These everyday scenarios 

illustrate that perception is not merely a passive registration of sensory input; rather, it is dynamically 

shaped by internal states such as working memory (WM) and motivation. When task -relevant 

information is actively maintained and aligned with goal -driven incentives, perceptual systems appear 

to operate at an enhanced level 1,2 .

A substantial body of behavioural work shows that working memory biases visual attention toward 

stimuli that match maintained information 3,4 , with effects emerging rapidly and potentially influencing 

early stages of visual processing 5,6 . Consistent with this, improved discrimination accuracy has been 

reported when target features correspond to WM content 7–9, often interpreted as reflecting enhanced 

perceptual sensitivity to target features. However, these benefits were typically observed in multi -item 

displays with distractors, raising the possibility that they reflect ed reduced noise rather than genuine 

enhancement of sensory signals 7,10 . Addressing this limitation, more recent findings using single -item 

displays without distractors demonstrate d that WM can still improve discrimination accuracy for target 

features (gap side) corresponding to memory -matching content ( colours ), even in the absence of 

stimulus competition 11,12 , suggesting a direct influence of WM on perceptual representations. These 

effects have been shown not to be driven by passive priming —defined as residual facilitation arising 

from recent stimulus exposure —but instead to reflect active WM -driven facilitati on, whereby task -

relevant information is deliberately maintained to bias processing toward matching stimuli. It has been 

shown that WM -driven facilitation enhances perceptual processing and may manifest as increase in 

perceptual sensitivity, potentially operating through faster orienting and/or improved sensory 

representation of target features 5,6,13,14 .

Together, these findings support the view that working memory can directly influence perceptual 

performance , while leaving open how such enhancements interact with other modulatory factors such 

as motivation. Complementing this line of work, research on motivational effects has shown that both 

reward and loss contexts can influence perceptual performance 15,16 . In particular, increases in reward 

value have been associated with enhanced perceptual sensitivity, suggesting that motivation can 

modulate perceptual representations 17,18 . To the best of our knowledge, only a single previous study 

has examined the combined effects of attention and motivation on visual task performance through 

systematic and independent manipulation of attentional and motivational influences 19 . Critically, 

although independent research studies have shown that both working memory and motivation can 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

enhance perceptual performance , their joint influence and the mechanisms through which they 

modulate perceptual processing remains insufficiently understood. One possibility is that motivation 

amplifies WM -driven facilitation 20 , in turn leading to enhanced perceptual performance. Alternatively, 

motivation and WM may exert independent additive influences on perceptual performance, resulting 

in greater enhancement than either factor alone. Addressing this question requires experim ental 

paradigms that isolate perceptual processing while systematically manipulating both motivational and 

working memory states. 

In the present study, we investigated the joint effects of motivation and visuospatial working memory 

on visual perception using a gap discrimination task adapted from a prior WM -based paradigm 11 ,

which examined the influence of visual WM content (e.g., red or blue colours ). Critically, we introduced 

two key modifications. First, rather than manipulating feature -based WM content (e.g., colours ), 

participants maintained spatially specific information in visuospatial WM. Spatial representations are 

fundamental to visual processing because they enable the visual system to organize, prioritize, and 

efficiently process behaviourally relevant informa tion across the visual field 21,22 . Thus, we focused on 

visuospatial WM, allowing us to test how location -based memory representations facilitate perceptual 

processing in the visual field. Second, we incorporated motivational manipulations through neutral, 

gain, and loss contexts, enabling us to test how motivational state modulates perceptual processing 

alongside WM -driven facilitation. Participants performed the gap discrimination task under 

systematically manipulated conditions: WM with motivation, motivation only, WM only, and a neutral 

baseline, allowing dissociation of their individual and joint contributions to perceptual discrimination 

performance. 

To examine the mechanisms underlying the joint effects, we employed behavioural, computational, 

and physiological approaches. Behaviourally, perceptual performance was quantified using statistical 

measures, including discrimination accuracy, reaction time, and efficiency score. Computationally, a 

Bayesian generalized linear psychometric model 23 estimated trial -by -trial fluctuations in effective 

perceptual sensitivity associated with motivational modulation and WM -driven facilitation. In 

addition, pupil diameter was recorded as a physiological index of arousal and cognitive effort during 

perceptu al processing 24,25 . Together, this framework allowed us to test whether motivation amplifies 

WM -driven facilitation to enhance perceptual sensitivity or whether motivation and WM exert 

independent additive influences, thereby providing mechanistic insight into how these inter nal states 

jointly shape perception. 

Understanding these mechanisms may provide insight into how human perceptual systems flexibly 

adapt to real -world demands 26 and progressively exceed baseline performance limits as cognitive and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

motivational factors align 27 , while also informing perceptual dysfunctions associated with disorders 

involving impairments in cognition and motivation 28,29 .

# Results 

# Behavioural Results 

Participants completed three task components during a single experiment al session : a perceptual 

threshold task to estimate participant -specific threshold stimulus duration, followed by the main 

perceptual discrimination task under visuospatial working memory and motivational state 

manipulations (hereafter, main task), and interleaved memory probe trials within the main task to 

verify active maintenance of the retro -cued spatial location. 

In the perceptual threshold task, participant -specific threshold presentation duration for the 

peripheral Landolt stimulus were estimated using a double random interleaved staircase procedure 

combined with psychometric fitting (see Methods and Fig. S 1). On each trial, stimulus presentation 

duration was adaptively varied between 100 -180 ms based on participant performance using two 

randomly interleaved staircases 30 . Performance across durations was subsequently fitt ed using a 

sigmoidal psychometric function, from which the presentation duration corresponding to 70% 

discrimination accuracy was estimated for each participant. Figure S 1 illustrates the trial structure of 

the threshold task and a representative psychometric fit from a single participant demonstrating 

threshold estimation. Across participants, the mean threshold duration corresponding to 70% 

discrimination accuracy was 142 ± 4 ms (mean ± SEM), providing participant -specific perceptual 

threshold duration within the range for use in the main task. 

In the main task, participants performed the experiment under four principal conditions: performance -

contingent monetary incentives combined with WM {Motivation, Cued}, motivational incentives 

without WM facilitation {Motivation, Non -cued}, WM without ince ntives {Neutral, Cued}, and a 

baseline condition lacking both motivational incentives and WM facilitation {Neutral, Non -cued} ( see 

Methods and Fig. 1A, B ). This design enabled isolation of the independent and joint contributions of 

motivational state and working memory relative to the baseline condition lacking both factors. Each 

trial began with sequential peripheral cue presentations followed by a retro -cue indicating the spatial 

location (out of 16 peripheral locations) to be actively maintained in working memory. After a delay 

period, participants performed a rapid perceptual d iscrimination task in which a briefly presented 

peripheral Landolt stimulus (participant -specific threshold duration ; range: 100 -180 ms ) required a 

left/right gap discrimination response, allowing assessment of perceptual processing under different 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Figure 1. Experimental paradigm and computational framework. (A) Trial structure of the main task. Each trial 

began with the sequential presentation of two spatial cues (Cue 1 and Cue 2; 500 ms each), separated by fixation 

intervals (1000 ms). A retro -cue (1 or 2; 500 ms) instructed participants which location (Cue 1 or Cue 2, 

respectively) to maintain in working memory (WM). Following a delay period (4000 ± 650 ms), a target stimulus 

appeared at one of the peripheral locations (142 ± 4 ms ). Participants indicated whether the gap in the perceptual 

target (a Landolt stimulus) was located on the left or right side within a 1000 ms response window. Feedback 

indicating whether the response was correct or incorrect was then presented for 400 ms. Trials were separated 

by a jittered inter -trial interval (2000 ± 460 ms). (B) Working memory trial types and motivational conditions. 

Main -task trials were indicated by blue -coloured cues. In cued (C) trials, the target appeared at the retro -cued 

location. In uncued (U) trials, the target appeared at one of the presented but non -cued location. In mismatched 

(M) trials, the target appeared at a location that had not been presented during the sequential cue period. 

Memory probe trials were interleaved throughout the ex periment to assess working memory performance. 

These trials followed the same sequence as main task trials but omitted the perceptual target. Instead, 

participants judged whether a probe location matched the retro -cued location. The probe location could 

co rrespond to a cued, uncued, or mismatched location, and memory probe trials were indicated by orange -

coloured cues. Motivational context was signalled by fixation colour: grey indicated neutral trials (no monetary 

outcome), green indicated gain trials (monetary reward), and r ed indicated loss trials (monetary penalty). (C) 

Computational framework of perceptual decision behaviour. Trial -wise motivational state  (𝑀 𝑡 ) and working -

memory state  (𝑊 𝑡 ) jointly influence perceptual processing (gap discrimination) through distinct but interacting 

pathways. The motivational state exerts both a direct influence on perceptual sensitivity (𝜂 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 ) and an indirect 

influence through modulation of WM -driven facilitation (𝜉 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 𝑊 𝑡 ). The WM state selectively enhances 

processing of the target stimulus at the remembered spatial location (𝜅 𝑖 𝑊 𝑡 ). These influences combine with 

baseline perceptual sensitivity  (𝛽 𝑖 ) to determine effective perceptual sensitivity  (𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> 𝑒𝑓𝑓

) on each trial. Coefficients 1

> Cue
> ms

Correct   

> esponse
> ms
> s target gap on le or right
> Memory trial CM trial
> oss eward eutral
> ight e

A

B          

> eedback
> Correct or ncorrect
> ms
> i
> ms Cue
> ms
> etro cue
> or
> ms
> Target Cued
> ms
> i
> ms
> i
> old
> ms
> Cued Ctrial ncued trial
> Mismatched Mtrial Memory trial

C           

> bsolute gap width
> Mot
> WM
> er
> ,
> ()
> (,)e ective
> ()baseline
> ,
> Motivational modulation
> WM -driven facilitation
> Combined effects
> correct
> For participant ,trial :
> ,()
> Increase in
> accuracy at same
> gap width ,
> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

𝛽 𝑖 , 𝜅 𝑖 , 𝜂 𝑖 , and  𝜉 𝑖  denote participant -specific strengths of baseline perceptual sensitivity, WM -driven facilitation, 

direct motivational modulation, and indirect motivational modulation of WM -driven facilitation, respectively. 

Here,  𝑖  denotes the participant index and  𝑡  denotes the trial index. Effective perceptual sensitivity corresponds 

to the slope of the psychometric decision function  (𝑓 𝐿 ) and determines the probability of a correct response, 

correct , for a given level of sensory evidence (absolute gap width  𝑔  ). The inset illustrates that, for a given 

level of sensory evidence, effective perceptual sensitivity yields greater perceptual accuracy than baseline 

perceptual sensitivity. 

motivational and WM states. Motivational states consisted of neutral, gain, and loss contexts, in which 

correct or incorrect responses were associated with no monetary consequence, monetary reward, or 

monetary penalty, respectively. In cued trials, the per ceptual target (Landolt stimulus) appeared at the 

retro -cued , i.e. actively maintained WM location; whereas in non -cued trials, target presentations 

were either at uncued or mismatched locations. Uncued locations referred to previously presented but 

non -maintained spatial positions ca pturing passive priming effects 11 , whereas mismatched locations 

referred to positions not presented during the cue sequence. Further task details are provided in 

Methods .

One participant was excluded due to poor perceptual discrimination performance in the { eutral, on 

cued } baseline condition (38.5% accuracy), falling below the predefined acceptable range (70% target 

threshold  ± 20% tolerance). This resulted in a final sample of 31 participants for subsequent analyses. 

Within the main task, memory probe trials were randomly interleaved among perceptual 

discrimination trials to verify active maintenance of the retro -cued location. The memory probe trials 

followed the same sequence as the main task but omitted the perceptual target; instead, participants 

judged whether a probe location matched the retro -cued location. These trials were indicated using a 

distinct cue color from the main trials ( Fig. 1B ). Performance on memory probe trials was significantly 

above chance level across participants ( mean ± SEM= 79.23% ± 2.04% ), confirming reliable 

maintenance of the retro -cued spatial location throughout the task ( 𝑡 (30 ) 14 .30 , 𝑝 6.2 × 10 −15 ,

one -sample  𝑡 -test against chance level of 50%). 

To examine the independent and joint effects of motivational state and WM on perceptual 

performance in the main task, behavioural data were analysed using repeated -measures ANOVAs on 

efficiency score, accuracy, and reaction time (RT). Efficiency score, com puted as accuracy/RT, was used 

as the primary behavioural metric because it jointly captures perceptual accuracy and response speed, 

thereby accounting for potential speed –accuracy trade -offs 31 . No response trials were excluded from 

the analyses. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

A 3 × 3 repeated -measures ANOVA on efficiency score with factors Motivation (loss, gain, neutral) and 

WM location during target presentation (cued, uncued, mismatched) revealed significant main effects 

of Motivation ( 𝐹 (2,60 ) 43.61 , 𝑝  2.02 × 10 -12 ) and WM location ( 𝐹 (2,60 ) 28.18 , 𝑝  2.35 × 10 -

> 9

), ( Fig. 2A ). Critically, the Motivation × WM interaction was not significant ( 𝐹 (4,120 ) 0.81 , 𝑝 

0. 52 ), suggesting largely additive influences of motivational state and WM on perceptual performance. 

Post hoc comparisons revealed significantly higher efficiency scores during motivational (loss, gain) 

relative to neutral conditions (𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑝 < 0.01 ), whereas gain and loss conditions did not significantly 

differ from one another ( 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑝 > 0.55 ; Table S1 ). Similarly, cued trials produced significantly greater 

efficiency scores compared with both uncued and mismatched trials ( 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑝 < 0.01 ), whereas uncued 

and mismatched conditions did not differ significantly ( 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑝 > 0.10 ; Table S1 ). These findings 

indicated that motivational incentives and WM independently enhanced perceptual discrimination 

performance with no evidence for interaction effects. Because behavioural performance was 

statistically comparable between gain and loss condition s, as well as between uncued and mismatched 

conditions, subsequent analyses were performed using a reduced 2 × 2 design consisting of 

{Motivation, Cued }, {Motivation, Non -cued}, {Neutral, Cued}, and {Neutral, Non -cued} conditions. Gain 

and loss trials were collapsed into a single motivational condition, whereas uncued and mismatched 

trials were collapsed into a non -cued condition. 

In the reduced 2 × 2 condition space, efficiency scores showed graded improvements across 

conditions, with both motivational state and WM independently enhancing perceptual performance 

relative to the {Neutral, Non -cued} baseline ( Fig. 2B ). Importantly, the combination of motivational 

state and WM ({Motivational, Cued}) produced the greatest behavioural enhancement, consistent with 

additive facilitative effects. A complementary 2 × 2 repeated -measures ANOVA similarly revealed 

significant main effects of Motivation (𝐹 (1,30 ) 68.66 , 𝑝  3.00 × 10 -9) and WM (𝐹 (1,30 )

54.89 , 𝑝  2.96 × 10 -8), but no interaction ( 𝐹 (1,30 ) 0.66 , 𝑝  0.42 ), confirming additive behavioural 

effects in the reduced condition space as well . (Detailed post -hoc statistics for the reduced 2 × 2 ANOVA 

are provided in Table S 2.) 

Accuracy analyses revealed a similar pattern ( Fig. 2C , Table S3 ), with higher discrimination accuracy 

during motivational and cued conditions relative to neutral and non -cued conditions, respectively 

(main effects of Mot:  𝐹 (1,30 ) 55.15 , 𝑝  2.82 × 10 -8, and WM:  𝐹 (1,30 ) 23.61 , 𝑝  3.4 × 10 -5). 

No significant Motivation × WM interaction was observed ( 𝐹 (1,30 ) 0.56 , 𝑝 0.46 ). RT analyses on 

correct trials demonstrated faster responses during motivational and cued conditions ( main effects of 

Mot:  𝐹 (1,30 ) 23.52 , 𝑝  3.56 × 10 -5, and WM:  𝐹 (1,30 ) 70.99 , 𝑝  2.11 × 10 -9; Fig. 2D ). A

significant Motivation × WM interaction was additionally observed ( 𝐹 (1,30 ) 6.84 , 𝑝 0.01 ), 

because WM -related effects (cued – non -cued) were larger in neutral than motivational trials as well 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

Figure 2. Behavioural effects of motivational state and visuospatial working memory on perceptual 

discrimination performance. (A) Mean efficiency score (accuracy/RT) across the full 3 × 3 experimental design 

comprising motivational state (loss, gain, neutral) and WM location during target presentation (cued, uncued ,

mismatched). (B) Mean efficiency score across the reduced 2 × 2 condition space used for subsequent 

computational modelling and pupillometry analyses. Gain and loss conditions were collapsed into a single 

motivational condition, whereas uncued and mismatched trials were collapsed into a non -cued condition. (C) 

Mean perceptual discrimination accuracy across the reduced 2 × 2 condition space. (D) Mean reaction times 

(RTs) for correct trials across the reduced 2 × 2 condition space. All data are s hown as mean ± SEM. Markers 

represent individual participant data points = 3 .

as motivational effects (mot – neu) were larger in non -cued than cued trials ( Table S4 ). The RT 

interaction indicated reduced scope for additional response -speed improvements when both WM and 

motivational facilitation were simultaneously present rather than either factor alone. However, the 

overall behavioural pattern remained broadly consi stent with additive facilitative contributions of 

motivation and WM, particularly for efficiency score and accuracy measure. 

# Computational Modelling 

To characterize the computational mechanisms underlying perceptual decision behaviour during the 

main task, behavioural responses were analysed using a Bayesian generalized linear psychometric 

model 23 . For each participant  𝑖 , the model estimated trial -by -trial fluctuations in effective perceptual Mot 

> eu
> Efficiency Score

A B                     

> CMCMCM
> CCued
> ncued
> MMismatched
> Con cued
> Mot Motivation
> eu eutral
> oss
> ain
> eu
> CCCC
> Efficiency Score
> CCCCCCCC
> Accuracy
> Reaction Time

C D

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

sensitivity (effPS; denoted by  𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 

> 𝑒𝑓𝑓

) associated with motivational and WM states , thereby modulating 

gap discrimination accuracy (i.e., probability of correct responses) for the same level of sensory 

evidence (gap width) ( Fig. 1C , see Methods ). Specifically, effPS was modelled as a linear additive 

function of baseline perceptual sensitivity (𝛽 𝑖 ), WM -driven facilitation (𝜅 𝑖 𝑊 𝑡 ), direct motivational 

modulation (𝜂 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 ), and indirect motivational modulation of WM -driven facilitation (𝜉 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 𝑊 𝑡 ). Trial -

wise experimental conditions were represented using binary variables, with motivational state 

(𝑀 𝑡 ) coded as 1 for motivational (loss /gain ) trials and 0 for neutral trials, and WM state (𝑊 𝑡 ) coded 

as 1 for cued trials and 0 for non -cued (uncued /mismatched) trials . The binary encoding of 

motivational and WM conditions was based on ANOVA results of behavioural efficiency scores, which 

revealed no significant differences between loss and gain conditions, as well as between uncued and 

mismatched conditions. The model therefore tested whether WM and motivation exerted 

independent additive influences on effPS , and/or whether motivation selectively amplified WM -driven 

facilitation. 

A family of eight nested candidate models was constructed by systematically including or excluding 

direct motivational modulation of perceptual sensitivity (Mot→Per), WM -driven facilitation effects 

(WM→Per), and motivational modulation of WM -driven facilitation (Mot→WM) ( Fig. 3A). Models 

were fitted using maximum a posteriori estimation and compared using random -effects Bayesian 

model comparison implemented in the Variational Bayesian Analysis (VBA) toolbox for MATLAB 32,33 .

Further details of model formulation, parameter estimation, and model comparison procedures are 

provided in the Methods .

Model comparison revealed that Model 4  (𝛽 , 𝜅 , 𝜂 ) provided the best account of behavioural 

performance across participants, exhibiting the highest expected model frequency (Ef = 0.81) and 

protected exceedance probability (pxp = 1.00) (Fig. 3B, C). The winning model included baseline 

perceptual sensitivity, WM -driven facilitation (Mot→Per) , and direct motivational modulation of 

perceptual sensitivity (WM→Per) , while excluding indirect motivational modulation of WM -driven 

facilitation (Mot→WM) . These findings indicate that motivational states enhanced perceptual 

decisions primarily through a global increase in perceptual sensitivity rather than through selective 

amplification of WM -related facilitation. Instead, motivation and WM exerted indepe ndent additive 

influences on perceptual sensitivity, jointly contributing to enhanced discrimination performance. 

Group -averaged parameter estimates for the winning model were as follows (mean ± SEM): baseline 

perceptual sensitivity (𝛽 ), 4.27 ± 0.18 (𝑡 (30 ) 23 .29 , 𝑝  0); WM -driven facilitation (𝜅 ), 2.82 ± 0.29 

(𝑡 (30 ) 9.62 , 𝑝  1.13 × 10 -10 ); and motivational modulation of perceptual sensitivity (𝜂 ), 3.48 ± 0.25 

(𝑡 (30 ) 14 .00 , 𝑝  1.1 × 10 -14 ) (Fig. 3D). Lapse rates were negligible (<10⁻⁷). All estimated parameters 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

were positive, consistent with facilitative contributions of both WM and motivational state to 

perceptual sensitivity and in turn to discrimination performance. 

Model -generated effective perceptual sensitivity estimates closely reproduced the empirical pattern 

of discrimination accuracy across motivational and WM conditions, indicating that the winning model 

captured the principal computational structure underlyin g perceptual decision behaviour ( Fig. 3E). 

Specifically, Figure 3E illustrates a graded increase in effective perceptual sensitivity across conditions, 

demonstrating additive contributions of motivational state and WM -driven facilitation to perceptual 

discrimination performance. The { Motivation , on cued } and { eutral , Cued } conditions produced 

comparable increases in perceptual sensitivity individually; however, when both factors were 

simultaneously present, perceptual sensitivity increased substantially further, consistent with additive 

enhancement effects and supported by the absence of a significant Motivation × WM interaction 

(𝐹 (1,30 ) 0, 𝑝 1.00 ).

To assess model generalizability of the winning model, we performed leave -one -participant -out cross -

validation (LOOCV). On each iteration, one participant was excluded, and group -average model 

parameters  (𝛽 , 𝜅 , 𝜂 ) estimated from the remaining participants were used to predict the left -out 

participant’s trial -wise choice accuracy (correct vs. incorrect). This procedure was repeated for all 31 

participants. Prediction accuracy was significantly above chance level (50% ), indicating that the model 

generalized well to unseen participants ( mean ± SEM = 78.51% ± 1.07% ; 𝑡 (30 ) 26 .70 , 𝑝 

1.83 × 10 −22 ). 

To further validate the behavioural relevance of the computational framework , effPS estimates derived 

from the winning model were correlated with behavioural measures across 31 participants and 4 

experimental conditions. effPS showed a strong positive correlation with discrimination accuracy 

(𝑟 0.81 , 𝑝 < 0.001 ), indicating that increases in model -derived perceptual sensitivity were 

associated with improved behavioural performance. In addition, effPS was positively correlated with 

efficiency scores (𝑟 0.75 , 𝑝 < 0.001 )and negatively correlated with reaction times (𝑟 −0.43 , 𝑝 <

0.001 ), suggesting that greater model -derived perceptual sensitivity was associated with faster and 

more efficient perceptual decisions. 

Overall, the computational modelling results suggest that motivational state and WM independently 

enhanced perceptual decision performance through additive increases in effective perceptual 

sensitivity. By modelling latent changes in perceptual sensitivity directly, this framework moves beyond 

descriptive behavioural measures and provides a mechanistic account of enhanced gap discrimination. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

Figure 3. Computational modelling of perceptual decision behaviour under motivational and WM states. 

(A) Candidate model space comprising eight nested Bayesian generalized linear psychometric models. Models 

systematically varied the inclusion or exclusion of direct motivational modulation of perceptual sensitivity 

(Mot→Per;  𝜂 ), WM -driven facilitation effects (WM→Per;  𝜅 ), and motivational modulation of WM -driven 

facilitation (Mot→WM;  𝜉 ), in addition to baseline perceptual sensitivity ( 𝛽 ). Solid arrows indicate included 

influences, whereas dashed arrows indicate absent influences. (B) Expected model frequencies obtained from 

random -effects Bayesian model comparison across the model space. (C) Protected exceedance probabilities for 

all can didate models. The inset illustrates the winning model (Model 4), which included baseline perceptual 

sensitivity ( 𝛽 ), WM -driven facilitation ( 𝜅 ), and direct motivational modulation of perceptual sensitivity ( 𝜂 ), while Mot 

> WM
> er
> Mot
> WM
> er
> Mot
> WM
> er
> Mot
> WM
> er
> Mot
> WM
> er
> Mot
> WM
> er
> Mot
> WM
> er
> Mot
> WM
> er

1 ( , , , ) 2 ( , , ) 3 ( , , ) 4 ( , , )

5 ( , ) 6 ( , ) 7 ( , ) 8 ( )

A  

> Motivational modulation WM -driven facilitation Dashed arrows indicate absence of influence Expected Model Frequency
> Protected Exceedance Probability

Model Space  

> Winning
> Model 4

Model Space 

Experimental Conditions       

> Motivation ,Cued
> Motivation ,on cued
> eutral ,Cued
> eutral ,on cued

B C

D E

> Winning Model Parameters
> Effective perceptual sensitivity
> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

excluding motivational modulation of WM facilitation ( 𝜉 ). (D) Group -level parameter estimates for the winning 

model, including baseline perceptual sensitivity ( 𝛽 ), WM -driven facilitation ( 𝜅 ), and motivational modulation of 

perceptual sensitivity ( 𝜂 ). (E) Model -derived effective perceptual sensitivity across the reduced 2 × 2 condition 

space: {Motivation, Cued }, {Motivation, Non -cued}, {Neutral, Cued}, and {Neutral, Non -cued}. All data in (D) and 

(E) are shown as mean ± SEM. Markers represent individual participant data points ( = 3 ). 

# Pupil dynamics track trial -by -trial fluctuations in effective perceptual 

# sensitivity 

We first examined whether pupil responses tracked trial -by -trial fluctuations in effective perceptual 

sensitivity (𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 

> 𝑒𝑓𝑓

), a latent computational variable integrating the influences of baseline perceptual 

sensitivity, working -memory facilitation, and motivational modulation. To this end, we applied a time -

resolved general linear model (GLM -1) to z -scored pupil responses during the perception window ( see 

Methods ; Fig. 4A, B, E ). The GLM -1 included a parametric effPS regressor and a general event -related 

(GER) regressor capturing pupil responses associated with task events common across trials. Figure 4B 

shows representative trial -wise raw values of regressor effPS for a single participant. This analysis 

allowed us to determine whether fluctuations in model -derived perceptual sensitivity were reflected 

in pupil dynamics independently of event -related responses. 

The GER regressor exhibited significant effects on pupil responses across most of the perception 

window, beginning after target o ff set and extending through response execution and feedback 

processing (475 –1900 ms) , consistent with task -evoked pupil responses associated with common trial 

events ( see horizontal significance bar in Fig. 4E ; all p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons across 

time using cluster -based permutation approach , see Methods ). After accounting for general event -

related pupil responses, effPS significantly modulated pupil dynamics during two distinct intervals 

within the perception window ( all p < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons; Fig. 4A ). The first 

significant interval emerged around response execution , i.e., during the late stages of response 

formation and extended into the post -response period ( 625 –1116 ms). Because this interval spanned 

response execution and preceded feedback onset, the observed modulation suggests that pupil 

dynamics tracked trial -by -trial fluctuations in processes contributing to perceptual decision formation. 

The persistence of this e ffect into the post -response period further suggests that pupil dynamics 

continued to reflect processing related to the completed perceptual judgment while participants 

awaited feedback. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Figure 4. upil dynamics track effective perceptual sensitivity and reveal temporally dissociable influences of 

working memory and motivation in the perception window. (A) Mean pupil response (PR; magenta, right axis) 

and time -resolved regression coefficients across participants for effective perceptual sensitivity (effPS; black, left 

axis) obtained from GLM -1. (B) Representative trial -wise effective perceptual sensitivity (effPS ) values from a 

single participant. Trial -wise effPS estimates were derived from the winning computational model and used as 

the parametric regressor in GLM -1. (C) Mean pupil response (PR; magenta, right axis) and time -resolved 

regression coefficients across participants for the working -memory (WM; blue, left axis) and motivational -state 

(Mot; brown, left axis) regressors obtained from GLM -2. (D) Representative trial -wise working memory (WM) 

and motivational state (Mot) regressors from a single participant. The WM regressor was coded as 1 for cued Time ms   

> esWin bk T
> Target
> egression coe  cients
> upil response  scored

Time ms   

> esWin bk T
> Target
> egression coe  cients
> PR
> effPS

Trials 

> Trial  wise regressor value

ective erceptual ensitivity 

Motivation 

Working Memory 

> Trial  wise regressor value

Trials 

> PR
> Mot
> WM
> upil response  scored

A B

C DTime ms   

> esWin bk T
> Target
> upil response  scored

Time ms           

> esWin bk T
> Target
> egression coe  cients
> GER GLM 1
> GER GLM 2
> Mot ,Cued
> Mot ,on cued
> eu ,Cued
> eu ,on cued
> Mean pupil response

perimental Conditions perimental Conditions             

> Mot ,Cued
> Mot ,on cued
> eu ,Cued
> eu ,on cued
> Mot ,Cued
> Mot ,on cued
> eu ,Cued
> eu ,on cued
> Mean pupil response

E F

G H

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

trials and 0 for non -cued trials, whereas the motivation regressor was coded as 1 for motivational (gain/loss) 

trials and 0 for neutral trials. (E) Time -resolved regression coefficients across participants for the general event -

related (GER) regressor obtained from GLM -1 (solid black) and GLM -2 (dashed black). The GER regressor 

captured pupil responses associated with task events common across trials , including target presentation, 

response execution, and feedback presentation. In panels A, C, and E, horizontal significance bars indicate time 

intervals during which effPS regression coefficients differed significantly from zero following cluster -based 

permutation correction (p < 0.05, corrected). (F) Mean pupil responses across participants for the four 

experimental conditions of the reduced 2 × 2 design: { Motivational, Cued } (light brown), { Motivational, on 

cued } (dark brown), { eutral, Cued } (light grey), and { eutral, on cued } (dark grey). In panels A, C, E, and F,

shaded regions indicate ± s.e.m. across participants and vertical dashed lines indicate the following events: target 

offset (100 ms), mean response time (RT = 661 ms), feedback onset (Fbk; 1100 ms), and the onset of the inter -

trial interval (ITI; 1500 ms). The response window (ResWin; 10 0–1100 ms) spans the period between target offset 

and feedback onset. (G) Condition -wise mean pupil responses across participants averaged over time points of 

the response window, showing significant WM -related effect in GLM -2 at group level (termed as the WM 

interval), shown separately for the four experimental conditions. (H) Condition -wise mean pupil responses across 

participants averaged over time points of the response window, showing significant motivation -related effect in 

GLM -2 at group level (termed as the Mot interval). In panels G and H, bars represent group means, er ror bars 

indicate ± s.e.m., and markers represent individual participant data points = 9 .

A second significant interval was observed near the end of the feedback period (1 450 –1900 ms; Fig. 

4A ). Because feedback is evaluated relative to the perceptual judgment that immediately preceded it ,

trial -by -trial variations in effPS continued to modulate pupil dynamics during outcome processing. 

Given the relatively slow temporal dynamics of pupil responses, this late effect likely reflects the 

continued influence of perceptual sensitivity during f eedback evaluation, indicating that its impact 

extended beyond response formation and into the processing of behavioural outcomes. 

Together, these findings demonstrate that, beyond the robust pupil responses associated with general 

task events, pupil dynamics reliably tracked latent trial -by -trial fluctuations in effective perceptual 

sensitivity during response formation and feedback evaluation periods . This pattern indicates that the 

influence of perceptual sensitivity extended beyond perceptual judgment itself and persisted during 

the processing of its outcome. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

# Temporal dissociation of working -memory and motivational influences 

# on pupil responses 

To dissociate the individual contributions of working memory and motivation to pupil dynamics, we 

performed a second time -resolved GLM (GLM -2) including separate regressors for experimental 

variables working -memory (𝑊 𝑡 ) and motivation (𝑀 𝑡 ) in addition to the GER regressor ( see Methods ;

Fig. 4C -E). Figure 4D shows representative trial -wise values of regressors motivation and WM for a 

single participant. As in GLM -1, the GER regressor exhibited significant effects on pupil responses 

across most of the perception window in GLM -2 as well (466 –1900 ms , all p < 0.05 corrected for 

multiple comparisons ; Fig 4E ). 

Beyond these general task -evoked effects, the second GLM revealed temporally dissociable effects of 

working memory and motivation across both the response and feedback periods (all p < 0.05, 

corrected for multiple comparisons; see horizontal significance bars in Fig. 4C ). During response 

window , WM -related effects emerged shortly after target offset and persisted into the early response 

window (133 –400 ms), suggesting that maintained WM representations influenced perceptual 

decision formation prior to response execution. Notably, WM -related modu lation re -emerged during 

the later stages of feedback presentation (1308 –1525 ms), indicating that the influence of the 

maintained memory representation persisted beyond decision formation and continued to shape the 

evaluation of behavioural outcomes. The early motivation -related effect emerged during target 

presentation and persisted beyond target offset (0 –225 ms), suggesting that motivational state 

influenced both the initial encoding of sensory information and the subsequent processing of the 

percep tual representation. This temporal profile is consistent with motivation enhancing task 

engagement and the utilization of sensory evidence during the early stages of perceptual decision 

formation. A second motivation -related effect emerged around the time of response execution and 

persisted continuously throughout the post -response and feedback periods until the end of the trial 

(650 –1900 ms), indicating a sustained influence of motivational state o n post -decisional processing, 

anticipation of behavioural outcomes, and feedback evaluation. 

Further, to directly quantify the condition -wise differences underlying the WM - and motivation -related 

pupil effects identified by the second GLM, we performed separate 2 × 2 repeated -measures ANOVAs 

on mean pupil responses extracted from the WM and motiva tion intervals of the response window 

(see Methods ; Fig. 4 F-H). Analyses were restricted to th e response window because it most directly 

captured the influence of working memory and motivation on perceptual decision formation and 

behaviour al performance. Within the WM interval, the ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of 

WM state ( 𝐹 (1,28 ) 5.33 , 𝑝 0.03 ), with larger pupil responses observed for cued relative to non -

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

cued trials. Neither the main effect of Motivation ( 𝐹 (1,28 ) 3.54 , 𝑝 0.08 ) nor the WM × 

Motivation interaction ( 𝐹 (1,28 ) 0.35 , 𝑝 0.56 ) reached significance, indicating that the observed 

pupil modulation within WM interval was selectively driven by WM cueing. In contrast, within the 

motivation interval, the ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of Motivation ( 𝐹 (1,28 ) 6.84 , 𝑝 

0.01 ), with larger pupil responses observed during motivational relative to neutral trials. Neither the 

main effect of WM state ( 𝐹 (1,28 ) 0.65 , 𝑝 0.43 ) nor the interaction ( 𝐹 (1,28 ) 1.16 , 𝑝 0.29 )

was significant, indicating that pupil modulation within Mot interval was selectively driven by 

motivational state. These findings complement the time -resolved GLM results by demonstrating that 

the early WM -related pupil effect primarily reflected differences between cued and non -cued trials, 

whereas the later motivation -related effect primarily reflected differences be tween motivational and 

neutral trials. Importantly, the absence of significant effects of motivation within the WM interval, and 

of WM within the motivation interval, confirms that the two temporal windows selectively captured 

WM - and motivation -related influences on pupil dynamics, respectivel y. 

Overall, the behavioural, computational, and pupillometric findings converge to demonstrate 

temporally dissociable influences of working memory and motivation on perceptual performance. 

Working memory cueing improved accuracy, reduced response times, and elicited pupil modulation 

shortly after target onset in the early response window, suggesting that maintained WM 

representations rapidly biased the processing of target stimulus at the remembered spatial location, 

there by facilitating perceptual decision formation prior to response execution. In contrast, motivation 

improved performance while exerting a more sustained influence on pupil dynamics extending from 

early stimulus processing through response execution to outcome evaluation , enhanced both the 

utilization of sensory evidence during perceptual decision making and the processing of behaviourally 

relevant outcomes during later stages of the trial. Together, these findings indicate that working 

memory primarily facilitated perceptu al decision formation, whereas motivation exerted a broader 

influence spanning both decisional and post -decisional processes .

# Discussion 

The present study investigated how motivational state and visuospatial working memory jointly shape 

perceptual sensitivity by integrating behavioural, computational, and physiological approaches. 

Although previous studies have independently demonstrated be neficial effects of WM and motivation 

on perception, the mechanisms through which these internal states interact during perceptual 

processing remained unclear. Two competing possibilities were considered: motivation may amplify 

WM -driven facilitation to modulate perceptual sensitivity , or motivation and WM may independently 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

contribute to perceptual sensitivity. Across behavioural, computational, and pupillometric analyses, 

our findings consistently supported the latter hypothesis. Behaviourally, both motivation and WM 

independently enhanced perceptual discrimination, producin g the greatest improvement when both 

factors were simultaneously present. Computational modelling further demonstrated that these 

enhancements were best explained by independent additive contributions of motivation and WM to 

effective perceptual sensitivit y rather than motivational amplification of WM -driven facilitation. 

Finally, pupil dynamics tracked model -derived fluctuations in effective perceptual sensitivity while 

revealing temporally dissociable signatures of WM and motivation during perceptual deci sion making. 

Together, these findings provide converging evidence that multiple top -down cognitive systems 

independently enhance perceptual sensitivity through complementary computational mechanisms. 

Our behavioural findings extend previous demonstrations that WM facilitates visual perception. 

Numerous studies have shown that information actively maintained in WM biases attention toward 

memory -matching stimuli and improves perceptual discrimination 3,4,9,11 . However, much of this work 

employed feature -based memory representations or visual search paradigms containing multiple 

competing stimuli, making it difficult to distinguish genuine enhancement of sensory representations 

from improved distractor filterin g 7,10 . By using a single near -threshold Landolt stimulus without 

competing distractors, the present study minimized stimulus competition and therefore provided 

stronger evidence that active visuospatial WM directly enhanced perceptual sensitivity. Furthermore, 

the comparable behavioural performance observed for uncued and mismatched trials suggests that 

simple residual activation arising from previous cue presentation was insufficient to facilitate 

perception 11 . Instead, the superior performance observed in cued trials is more consistent with active 

maintenance of task -relevant spatial information rather than passive priming, supporting recent 

proposals that WM selectively biases sensory processing through activ ely maintained representations 

rather than residual stimulus activation 5,11 .

The behavioural results also demonstrate that motivational incentives independently improved 

perceptual performance. Both gain and loss contexts enhanced discrimination accuracy and efficiency 

relative to neutral trials, consistent with previous reports th at motivational significance enhances 

perceptual processing and increases behavioural sensitivity 16,18,19 . Importantly, gain and loss produced 

statistically comparable improvements, suggesting that motivational salience, rather than reward 

valence per se, was sufficient to facilitate perceptual performance. More critically, behavioural 

measures revealed no ev idence that motivation selectively enhanced WM -driven facilitation. Instead, 

motivation and WM contributed independently to behavioural improvements, with the combined 

motivational and cued condition producing the highest performance. Although reaction tim es showed 

a significant interaction, this pattern likely reflects reduced opportunity for further response -speed 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

improvements when perceptual decisions had already been facilitated by either WM or motivational 

state. Consistent with this interpretation, the primary behavioural measures of efficiency score and 

accuracy both supported additive rather than synergistic i nfluences of motivation and WM. 

The computational modelling provides a mechanistic explanation for these behavioural observations. 

Rather than relying solely on descriptive behavioural measures, we estimated trial -by -trial fluctuations 

in effective perceptual sensitivity, a latent variab le representing the computational gain of perceptual 

processing. Critically, the nested model comparison directly evaluated the two competing hypotheses 

proposed in the Introduction. The winning model incorporated baseline perceptual sensitivity, WM -

driven facilitation, and direct motivational modulation of perception while excluding motivational 

modulation of WM -driven facilitation. Thus, the data provided positive evidence that motivation 

enhances perceptual processing through a global increase in percept ual sensitivity rather than by 

selectively strengthening WM -related facilitation. This distinction is theoretically important because a 

nonsignificant behavioural interaction alone cannot discriminate between alternative computational 

architectures 23,34,35 . In contrast, Bayesian model comparison explicitly demonstrated that independent 

additive pathways better explained behavioural performance than models proposing hierarchical 

modulation of WM by motivation. The high protected exceedance probability, succe ssful leave -one -

participant -out prediction, and strong correlations between effective perceptual sensitivity and 

behavioural measures further indicate that the model captured a meaningful latent mechanism 

underlying perceptual decision making rather than s imply fitting observed behaviour. 

These findings contribute to growing evidence that multiple top -down cognitive processes converge 

on sensory processing through distinct computational pathways. Working memory has been proposed 

to selectively enhance representations of behaviourally releva nt information by increasing the priority 

of maintained sensory templates 1,6 , whereas motivational state has been suggested to globally 

increase behavioural readiness and sensory gain through value -dependent mechanisms 18,36 . Our 

computational results support this conceptual distinction. Whereas WM selectively enhanced 

processing of stimuli appearing at the maintained spatial location, motivational state produced a 

broader enhancement of perceptual sensitivity that operated i ndependently of WM state. Thus, rather 

than interacting within a single hierarchical mechanism, WM and motivation appear to represent 

complementary top -down systems whose effects converge at the level of perceptual sensitivity. 

The pupillometry results provide an important physiological validation of this computational 

framework. Pupil diameter has been widely associated with cognitive effort, arousal, and locus 

coeruleus -noradrenergic activity 24,25,37,38 . Our first GLM demonstrated that pupil responses tracked 

trial -by -trial fluctuations in model -derived effective perceptual sensitivity after accounting for general 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

task -evoked responses. This finding suggests that pupil dynamics reflected the latent computational 

variable underlying perceptual performance rather than merely sensory stimulation or motor 

execution. The persistence of this relationship during both respo nse formation and feedback 

processing further indicates that effective perceptual sensitivity continued to influence post -decisional 

evaluation, consistent with the relatively slow temporal dynamics of the pupil response. 

By dissociating WM and motivation within a second GLM, we further demonstrated distinct temporal 

signatures of these top -down processes. WM -related pupil modulation emerged shortly after target 

presentation and during the early response window, suggesting rapid prioritization of maintained 

spatial representations during perceptual decision formation. In contrast, motivational influences 

appeared during initial stimulus processing and persisted throughout response execution and 

feedback evaluation, indicatin g a broader role in sustaining task engagement, utilization of sensory 

evidence, and processing of behavioural outcomes. The accompanying ANOVAs confirmed that these 

temporal intervals selectively reflected WM and motivational influences, respectively, wit h little 

evidence for cross -factor modulation. These results complement the computational findings by 

demonstrating that, although WM and motivation converge on the common outcome of enhanced 

perceptual sensitivity, they remain temporally dissociable physi ological processes. 

Several limitations should be acknowledged. First, the study examined healthy young adults 

performing a visuospatial discrimination task with monetary incentives, and therefore generalization 

to other age groups, sensory modalities, or motivational context s requires further investigation. 

Second, although pupillometry provides a valuable index of cognitive and arousal -related processes, it 

does not directly identify the underlying neural circuits. Future studies combining computational 

modelling with electr ophysiological or neuroimaging approaches could determine how frontoparietal 

control systems, visual cortex, and neuromodulatory networks jointly implement the independent 

influences of WM and motivation identified here. Finally, extending the computational framework to 

more complex naturalistic environments may further clarify how multiple cognitive states dynamical ly 

regulate perception during real -world behaviour. 

In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that visuospatial working memory and motivational 

state independently enhance perceptual sensitivity through complementary computational 

mechanisms. Behavioural performance, computational modelling, and pupillo metry converged on the 

conclusion that motivation does not amplify WM -driven facilitation but instead contributes an 

independent increase in perceptual sensitivity while exhibiting a distinct temporal profile during 

perceptual decision making. By integrati ng behavioural, computational, and physiological evidence 

within a unified framework, this work advances our understanding of how multiple top -down cognitive 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

systems cooperate to optimize perception under goal -directed behaviour and provides a mechanistic 

foundation for future investigations of perceptual dysfunction in conditions involving impairments of 

cognition and motivation. 

# Methods 

# Participants 

A sample size of 32 participants was based on statistical power analysis conducted using G*Power tool  

> 39

for a within -subjects 3 × 3 repeated -measures design, with factors motivation al state (loss , gain, 

neutral ) and WM location during target presentation (cued, uncued, mismatched). The participants 

were enrolled through an online recruitment system. All participants reported normal or corrected -to -

normal vision, no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders, and performed the experiment using 

their dominant hand. All participants were naïve to the hypotheses of the study. Participants received 

a fixed monetary compensation for participation (₹120 per hour) along with a performance -dependent 

bonus tied to accuracy in the main task. All participants provided written informed consent prior to 

the experiment and participated in a practice session. The study was approved by the Institute Ethics 

Committee, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur under reference number IEC/IITJ/ 2023 -24/9.24. 

For behavioural analyses, data from one participant was excluded due to poor perceptual 

discrimination performance in the neutral baseline condition (38.5% accuracy), falling below the 

predefined acceptable limit (70% target threshold  ± 20% tolerance). The final behavioural sample 

therefore comprised 31 participants (age: 23.0 7 ± 3.50 years old; 15 females). For eye -tracking 

(pupillometry) analyses, two more participants were excluded due to data loss (greater than 20% of 

trials lost due to excessive blinking), in addition to the participant excluded from behavioural analyses. 

The final eye -tracking sample thus consisted of 29 participants (age: 22.90 ± 3.50 years old; 1 4

females ). 

# Experimental Design 

## Stimuli 

Visual s timuli corresponding to distinct task components , includ ed motivational, visuospatial working 

memory, and perceptual target stimuli (Fig. 1A, B ). Stimuli were presented against a uniform grey 

background on a calibrated monitor ( resolution 1,080 × 1,920 pixels, refresh rate = 120 Hz ), positioned 

at a 60 cm viewing distance . Monetary associations (motivational state) in the main task were 

conveyed via colour of the central fixation square (0.5° visual angle) presented throughout each trial, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

with grey indicating neutral (no monetary outcome), green indicating reward (gain), and red indicating 

penalty (loss) conditions . In gain trials, participants earned ₹10 for each correct response and received 

no money for incorrect responses. In loss trials, participants incurred a penalty of −₹10 for each 

incorrect response, with no money for correct responses. At the end of the session, participants 

received their total earnings based on task performance (up to a maximum of ₹640), in addition to a 

fixed participation fee of ₹120 per hour. Visuospatial w orking memory stimuli consisted of coloured 

circular cues (0.6° diameter) presented at 16 equidistant peripheral locations arranged along an 

imaginary circle centred on fixation at 6° eccentricity (radial distance from central fixation square ), 

spanning the full peripheral visual field 40 . Cue colours differed across trial types, with blue used for 

the main trials and orange for memory probe trials . The perceptual target employed was a Landolt 

stimulus (0.5° visual angle) , a standardized shape with a small gap (0.15° visual angle) appearing as a 

broken shape , based on a previous work 11 . Participants were required to identify the position of the 

gap (left or right), allowing precise assessment of visual discrimination performance. The Landolt 

stimulus was always presented on top of a coloured circular cue at one of 16 peripheral locations 

arranged around fixation. Thus, the target and the cue were spatially aligned, appearing at the same 

location on each trial (Fig. 1A, B ).

## Perceptual t hreshold task 

Prior to the main task, each participant performed a perceptual threshold task, to estimate a

participant -specific target presentation duration at an accuracy of 70% (Fig. S 1). Participants 

maintained central fixation throughout the threshold task. On each trial, they performed a visual 

discrimination task, reporting the gap side (left or right) of the Landolt stimulus presented on top of a 

blue circular cue at one of the 16 peripheral locations. Each trial began with a jittered fixation period 

(2000 ± 460 ms ), followed by a brief target presentation (see next paragraph for duration). Participants 

responded within  1000 𝑚𝑠  of target offset, after which feedback was provided (400 ms ;

correct/incorrect). The threshold task comprised of 192 trials in total. The sixteen spatial locations and 

the two gap sides (left, right) were equally represented and presented in pseudo -random order. Gap 

direction was balanced across spatial locations and hemispheres. Short breaks ( ≈60 s ) were provided 

after every 16 trials to minimize fatigue. 

Target presentation duration in each trial was adaptively manipulated using a double random 

interleaved staircase procedure 30 implemented via two overlapping duration ranges: staircase A 

(100 , 120 , 140 𝑚𝑠 ) and staircase B ( 140 , 160 , 180 𝑚𝑠 ). The double interleaved staircase method 

estimates perceptual threshold by running two independent adaptive staircases in parallel, with trials 

randomly drawn from either staircase. Each staircase varies stimulus intensity (here, target duration) 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

based on performance. Random interleaving prevents participants from predicting trial difficulty, 

thereby minimizing expecta ncy effects and response strategies. The durations in staircases A and B 

were selected to cover the range around near -threshold discriminability (70%) for brief peripheral 

presentations at ~6° eccentricity, where visual discrimination is constrained by reduced acuity 40 . In 

particular, the duration range ( 100 -180 ms ) was selected based on pilot testing to span performance 

from near -chance to saturation levels (~50 -100%) for the present peripheral stimulus configuration. 

The two staircases were designed to overlap at 140 ms . This overlap allowed both staircases to 

converge toward a common performance level while reducing sensitivity to starting values and 

improving the stability of threshold estimation .

Within each staircase, a one -up/three -down rule 41 was applied , where a single incorrect response 

increased stimulus duration (easier), whereas three consecutive correct responses decreased duration 

(harder). This asymmetric rule allowed convergence at approximately 70% correct performance, as 

decreases in duration require sustained accuracy, whereas increases occur after a single error. 

Consequently, not all stimulus durations necessarily occurred for every participant. For example, if 

three consecutive correct responses were not achieved at a given level (e.g., 120 ms ), the staircase did 

not progress to shorter durations (e.g., 100 ms ). On the other hand , consistently correct responses at 

a given duration (e.g.,  160 𝑚𝑠 ) prevented progression to longer durations (e.g., 180 ms ). Thus, the 

effective range of presented durations was participant -specific. 

Performance across durations was fit for each participant using a sigmoidal psychometric function 

characterized by bias ( 𝜇 ) and sensitivity ( 𝜎 ) parameters (Fig. S1 ). The bias parameter ( 𝜇 ) reflects the 

point of subjective equality, whereas the sensitivity parameter ( 𝜎 ) indexes the steepness of the 

psychometric curve, i.e., sensitivity to changes in stimulus duration. The fitted function was then used 

to estimate the target presentation duration corresponding to 70% discrimination accuracy for each 

participant. By combi ning two interleaved staircases with adaptive updating and psychometric fitting, 

the procedure yielded a robust and unbiased estimate of participant -specific perceptual threshold 

duration .

## Main task 

The main task combined motivational and visuospatial working memory state manipulations to 

examine their independent and joint effects on visual perception ( Fig. 1A , B). To ensure compliance 

with the WM requirement, memory probe trials were interleaved throughout the task. Each 

participant completed 240 trials, comprising 192 main task trials and 48 memory probe trials. Short 

breaks  (≈60 s ) were provided after every 40 trials to minimize fatigue. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

The main task consisted of trials varying across motivational state (neutral, gain, loss) and WM 

condition (cued, non -cued). The task began with 64 neutral trials, consisting of 32 cued and 32 non -

cued trials (equally divided into uncued and mismatched conditions) presented in a pseudo -random 

order. This was followed by 64 loss and 64 gain trials, also presented in pseudo -random order. Within 

each motivational condition (loss and gain), trials were evenly split between cued and non -cued t rial 

types. A cued trial was defined as one in which the perceptual target appeared at the spatial location 

actively maintained in working memory, whereas a non -cued trial was one in which the target 

appeared at a different location (see next paragraph for definitions of uncued and mismatched trials). 

Neutral trials preceded motivational trials to establish an unbiased baseline and minimize carryover 

effects of motivational state due to gain or loss. Additionally, 16 memory probe trials were interleaved 

within each main task condition (neutral, gain, loss), yielding a total of 48 memory trials. 

Participants maintained central fixation throughout the experiment (Fig. 1A, B ). Trials were separated 

by a jittered inter -trial interval (ITI; 2000 ± 460 ms ). Each trial began with the sequential presentation 

of two blue circular WM cues ( 500 ms each) separated by a  1000 𝑚𝑠  interval. Th e cue positions were 

distinct and drawn from 16 equidistant peripheral locations. A retro -cue (1 or 2; 500 ms ) then indicated 

which location was to be maintained in WM. After a jittered delay ( 4000 ± 650 ms ), a Landolt target 

briefly appeared according to participant -specific threshold duration (range: 100 -180 ms ) at either the 

cued, uncued, or mismatched spatial location. The cued location corresponded to the retro -cued 

position, the uncued location to a presented position but unselected for maintenance , and the 

mismatched location to a position not presented during sequential cue presentation period .

Participants reported the gap side (left/right) within 1000 ms of target offset, followed by feedback 

(correct/incorrect; 400 ms ). 

Memory probe trials followed the same trial sequence as main trials but omitted the perceptual target. 

Instead, participants judged whether a test location matched the retro -cued location. The test location 

could be cued, uncued, or mismatched, and the se trials were distinguished by orange cues (Fig. 1A, 

B).

The sixteen spatial locations, two retro -cue numbers (1, 2), and two target gap sides (left, right) were 

equally represented across all conditions of the 3 × 3 design ( cued, uncued, mismatched × neutral ,

gain, loss ) as well as in the memory probe trials . Each spatial location appeared equally often as Cue 

1, Cue 2, and as a target location , and was retro -cued an equal number of times. Gap direction 

(left/right) was balanced across spatial locations and hemispheres. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

# Computational model of perceptual decision behaviour 

To provide a mechanistic account of perceptual performance , behavioural responses were modelled 

using Bayesian generalized linear framework grounded with in psychometric decision theory, here 

referred to as a generalized linear psychometric model 23 . This approach was inspired by Bayesian 

generalized linear mixed model ling 42 and ideal observer analysis in signal detection theory 43,44 . For 

broader meth odological o verview s, refer elsewhere 23,35,45 . Responses were modelled as binary 

outcomes (correct vs. incorrect) under a logistic decision function. For participant  𝑖 , the probability of 

a correct response on trial  𝑡  was determined by a latent decision variable , corresponding to the slope 

of the decision functio n:

𝑃 (correct 𝑖 ,𝑡 ) 𝛾 (1 − 𝛾 − 𝜆 ) ∙ 𝑓 𝐿 (𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡 ⋅∣ g ∣) (1) 

Where , 𝛾  and  𝜆  are non -sensory lower and upper asymptotic lapse rates, respectively , logistic function 

𝑓 𝐿 (𝑥 ) 1/(1 𝑒 −𝑥 ), 𝑔  denotes the absolute gap width representing stimulus strength (fixed here 

at  𝑔 0.15 ∘) and  𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> 𝑒𝑓𝑓

denotes the effective perceptual sensitivity corresponding to the slope of 

the psychometric decision function . The lower and upper asymptotic error rates were tied together to 

reduce model complexity and enforce unbiased lapse behaviour 38 .

For participant  𝑖 , effective sensitivity on trial  𝑡  was modelled as a linear weighted combination of 

sensory evidence, working memory, and motivational state 23 :

𝛽 𝑖 ,𝑡  

> 𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝛽 𝑖 𝜂 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 (𝜅 𝑖 𝜉 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 )𝑊 𝑡 (2) 

where, coefficients  𝛽 𝑖 , 𝜅 𝑖 , 𝜂 𝑖 , and  𝜉 𝑖  denote participant -specific strength s of baseline perceptual 

sensitivity, WM -driven facilitation, direct motivational modulation, and indirect motivational 

modulation of WM -driven facilitation, respectively. In contrast,  𝑀 𝑡  and  𝑊 𝑡  denote trial -wise 

experimental conditions shared across participants.  𝑀 𝑡  was coded as 1 for motivational (gain/loss) 

trials and 0 for neutral trials, whereas  𝑊 𝑡  was coded as 1 for cued trials and 0 for uncued and 

mismatched trials. The binary coding of experimental conditions was based on the reduced 2 x 2 

condition space and effects observed in the behavioural ANOVA analyses. 

This formulation was based on evidence suggesting that motivational states exert a relatively global 

enhancement on perceptual and cognitive processing 36 , whereas WM selectively facilitates processing 

of task -relevant stimuli 12,14 . Accordingly, the term  𝜂 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡  models the direct global influence of 

motivation on perceptual sensitivity independent of WM state, while the term (𝜅 𝑖 

𝜉 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 )𝑊 𝑡  captures both the direct WM -driven facilitation of perception (𝜅 𝑖 𝑊 𝑡 ) and the indirect 

motivational amplification of WM -driven facilitation (𝜉 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 𝑊 𝑡 ). Together, these components determine 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

trial -by -trial fluctuations in effective perceptual sensitivity underlying perceptual discrimination 

performance (Fig. 1C ). 

## Model comparison 

To identify how distinct components co ntribute to enhanced discrim in ation accuracy , a family of 

nested models was constructed from the full model (Eq. 2) by systematically including or excluding (i) 

direct motivational influences on perceptual sensitivity  (𝑀𝑜𝑡 → 𝑃𝑒𝑟 ), (ii) WM –driven facilitation 

effects  (𝑊𝑀 → 𝑃𝑒𝑟 ), and (iii) motivational modulation of WM -driven facilitation  (𝑀𝑜𝑡 → 𝑊𝑀 ). For 

a similar approach to constructing and testing nested computational models, see Park et al. 34 . This 

procedure yielded a total of eight candidate models, including the full model and a null model 

capturing only baseline perceptual sensitivity without contributions from motivation or working 

memory (Fig. 3A ). 

The candidate models were then compared using random -effects Bayesian model comparison 

implemented using the Variational Bayesian Analysis (VBA) toolbox in MATLAB 33 . First, at the subject 

level, participant -specific parameters (𝛽 𝑖 , 𝜅 𝑖 , 𝜂 𝑖 , 𝜉 𝑖 ) were estimated independently using maximum a 

posteriori (MAP) estimation with weakly informative Gaussian priors to minimize undue prior influence 

on posterior estimates 34 . Priors were defined in unconstrained parameter space with mean (𝜇 =0) and 

large variance (𝜎 =5) , based on previous work 34 . Model parameters (𝛽 𝑖 , 𝜅 𝑖 , 𝜂 𝑖 , 𝜉 𝑖 ) were constrained to 

be positive values within a range ( 0−5). Upper parameter bounds were selected to remain within 

biologically plausible ranges of increases in psychometric slope and perceptual sensitivity produced by 

top -down modulation in visual psychophysics 46 .

Fo r each participant, m odel fit was quantified using the negative log posterior at the MAP solution ,

corresponding to a model evidence estimate incorporating both likelihood and prior terms 47 . These 

subject -wise model evidence estimates were subsequently entered into a group -level random -effects 

(RFX) Bayesian model comparison 32 . This hierarchical RFX formulation allows for inter -individual 

variability, such that different participants may be better explained by different models rather than 

enforcing a single best model across all participants . Group -level inference was then performed over 

the posterior distribution of model evidences , from which expected model frequencies and protected 

exceedance probabilities were derived. Expected model frequency represents the estimated 

proportion of participants in the population for whom a given model is most likely to explain 

behavioural data under the random -effects Bayesian framework. The winning model was identified as 

the model with the highest protected exceedance probability. Protected exceedance probability is 

derived from the posterior distribution of expected model frequencies and quantifies the probability 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

that a given model is more frequent than all competing models in the population beyond chance -level 

differences 32,48 .

# Pupil data acquisition and preprocessing 

Pupil diameter from the left eye was recorded using a Tobii Pro Fusion eye tracker (Tobii AB, Stockholm, 

Sweden) at a sampling rate of 120 Hz. A 9 -point calibration procedure was employed at the start of 

the main task and after each break during the task. A chin rest was used throughout the experiment 

to reduce head movements and maintain stable eye -tracking quality.  Saccades and blinks were 

detected  using custom routines  for preprocessing eye -tracking data  implemented in MATLAB (version 

24.1; The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). To maintain central fixation throughout the experiment, gaze 

position was continuously monitored online. Whenever participants deviated by more than 1° of visual 

angle from the fixation point, the central fixation square increased in size, providing immediate visual 

feedback to guide gaze back to fixation. Periods of signal loss due to blinks were reconstructed using 

linear interpolation with a half -window of 50 ms before and after each blink. The interpolated signal 

was subsequently low -pass filtered at 4 Hz using a third -order Butterworth filter . Participants for whom 

more than 20% of total trials were lost due to signal loss or no response, were removed from further 

analysis (percentage removed trials across 29 participants, mean ± SD = 3.72% ± 5. 78 %) 

Pupil diameter reflects both slower tonic changes associated with arousal and motivation, as well as 

transient phasic responses linked to task -related cognitive processes 25,37,49 . Consequently, global z -

scoring across all trials may be influenced by condition -dependent tonic shifts, potentially reducing 

sensitivity to transient WM -related effects. To preserve sensitivity to WM effects within each 

motivational state, pupil data wer e normalized separately for neutral and motivational conditions. 

Specifically, cued and non -cued trials were z -scored together within the neutral condition and 

separately within the motivational (gain and loss) conditions using the corresponding participan t-

specific mean and standard deviation. This approach reduced the influence of broad motivational 

differences in baseline pupil diameter while preserving WM -related fluctuations within each 

motivational state 24,25 .

# Pupil regression analysis 

To examine whether pupil dynamics tracked computational and experimental factors underlying 

perceptual performance, we employed two complementary time -resolved general linear model (GLM) 

analyses during the perception window (target onset to post -feedback; Fig. 1A ) (Palaskar & Dang, 

2024) . The first GLM examined whether pupil responses tracked trial -by -trial fluctuations in effective 

perceptual sensitivity (effPS) estimated from the winning computational model. Because effPS 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

represents an integrated measure combining the influences of working -memory and motivation on 

perceptual sensitivity, a second GLM was designed to temporally dissociate the independent 

contributions of working -memory and motivational state to pupil dynamics by modelling their trial -

wise experimental conditions separately. Together, these analyses allowed us to determine whether 

pupil responses reflected the integrated computational variable underlying perceptual performance 

(effPS) and to identify the distinct temporal signatures of working memory and motivation contributing 

to that variable (Fig. 4 ).

For the first GLM, t rial -wise estimates of effPS were derived from the winning model identified through 

the nested model comparison procedure described above and computed using participant -specific 

parameters ( 𝛽 𝑖 , 𝜅 𝑖 , 𝜂 𝑖 ) and trial -wise experimental conditions (𝑊 𝑡 , 𝑀 𝑡 ). These estimates reflected trial -

by -trial variations in perceptual sensitivity arising from the combin ation of baseline perceptual 

sensitivity (𝛽 𝑖 ), WM -driven facilitation (𝜅 𝑖 𝑊 𝑡 ), and direct motivational modulation (𝜂 𝑖 𝑀 𝑡 ). For each 

participant, GLM analysis was performed on preprocessed, z -scored pupil time series from the main 

task. At each time point within a trial, pupil responses were modelled using two regressors: (i) a

general event -related (GER) regressor capturing pupil responses associated with task events common 

to all trials, including target presentation, motor response, and feedback presentation, and (ii) a 

parametric effPS regressor indexing trial -by -trial fluctuations in model -derived perceptual sensitivity 

(z -scored within participants; see representative trial -wise effPS values for a single participant in Fig. 

4B ). The GER regressor was coded as 1 during the target, response, and feedback epochs and 0 

otherwise, thereby accounting for pupil responses associated with task events common across trials. 

The effPS regressor captured latent variations in effective perceptual sensitivity estimated from the 

winning computational model. Both regressors were entered simultaneously into the GLM to 

dissociate sensitivity -related pupil modulation from general event -related pupil responses. 

For the second GLM, pupil responses were modelled using three regressors: (i) a general event -related 

(GER) regressor as for the first GLM , (ii) a working -memory regressor ( 𝑊 𝑡 ; coded 1 for cued and 0 for 

non -cued trials), and (iii) a motivational -state regressor ( 𝑀 𝑡 ; coded 1 for motivational and 0 for neutral 

trials). All regressors were entered simultaneously into the model. This analysis enabled temporal 

dissociation of WM -related and motivational contributions to pupil dynamics that were otherwise 

combined within the integrated effPS measure (see representative trial -wise  𝑊 𝑡  and  𝑀 𝑡  regressors for 

a single participant in Fig. 4D ).

Regression coefficients (beta weights) were estimated separately at each time point relative to target 

onset, yielding time -resolved measures of the contribution of each regressor to pupil dynamics. For 

group -level inference, a random -effects analysis was performed using a summary -statistic approach, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

whereby participant -specific regression coefficients were entered into one -sample t -tests against zero 

at each time point (Penny and Holmes, 2003). Multiple -comparison correction across time was 

performed using a non -parametric cluster -based permutation approach. Contiguous time points 

exceeding an initial uncorrected threshold (p < 0.05) were identified as candidate clusters, and each 

cluster was ass igned a statistic equal to the sum of its constituent t -values. The significance of the 

observed clusters was determined by comparison with a null distribution generated from 1000 

permutations , considered significant at p < 0.05 (cluster -corrected) ; shown as horizontal significance 

bars in Fig. 4 A, C , E ). 

## ANOVA on mean pupil responses 

To complement the second time -resolved GLM analys is, we conducted an additional ANOVA on mean 

pupil responses (Fig. 4F -H). Whereas the GLM analys is were designed to identify the temporal 

relationship between pupil dynamics and experimental variables, it did not directly quantify condition -

wise differences in pupil dynamics across the 2 × 2 experimental design : {Motivation, Cued }, 

{Motivation, Non -cued}, {Neutral, Cued}, and {Neutral, Non -cued} . Therefore, an additional analysis 

was performed to examine how pupil responses differed across conditions as a function of working -

memory state and motivational state. For each participant, pupil responses were averaged separately 

within two intervals identified using the second GLM analysis: the WM interval (defined by the 

significant  𝑊 𝑡  effect) and the motivation interval (defined by the significant  𝑀 𝑡  effect) within the 

response window (see upil regression analysis ). Because these intervals most directly captured the 

influence of working memory and motivation on perceptual decision formation and performance, 

subsequent analyses were restricted to these response window intervals. This yield ed mean pupil 

responses for each of the four experimental condition s. The resulting values were entered into 

separate 2 × 2 repeated -measures ANOVAs with within -subject factors Motivation (motivational, 

neutral) and WM (cued, non -cued) to determine whether pupil modulation within each interval of the 

response window was selectively associated with its corresponding factor or additionally influenced 

by the other factor and their interaction. Significant effects were followed by Bonferroni -corrected 

post hoc comparisons. This analysis allowed us to characterize the inde pendent and joint effects of 

working memory and motivation on condition -wise pupil responses. 

# References 

1. Gilbert, C. D. & Li, W. Top -down influences on visual processing. at. ev. eurosci. 14 , 350 –

363 (2013). 

2. Caras, M. L. & Sanes, D. H. Top -down modulation of sensory cortex gates perceptual learning. 

roc. atl. cad. ci. . . . 114 , 9972 –9977 (2017). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

3. Kiyonaga, A. & Egner, T. Working memory as internal attention: Toward an integrative 

account of internal and external selection processes. sychon. Bull. ev. 20 , 228 –242 (2013). 

4. Soto, D., Hodsoll, J., Rotshtein, P. & Humphreys, G. W. Automatic guidance of attention from 

working memory. Trends Cogn. ci. 12 , 342 –348 (2008). 

5. Hollingworth, A., Matsukura, M. & Luck, S. J. Visual Working Memory Modulates Rapid Eye 

Movements to Simple Onset Targets. sychol. ci. 24 , 790 –796 (2013). 

6. Schneegans, S., Spencer, J. P., Schöner, G., Hwang, S. & Hollingworth, A. Dynamic interactions 

between visual working memory and saccade target selection. J. Vis. 14 , (2014). 

7. Cosman, J. D. & Vecera, S. P. The contents of visual working memory reduce uncertainty 

during visual search. ttention, erception, sychophys. 73 , 996 –1002 (2011). 

8. Han, S. W. Working memory contents enhance perception under stimulus -driven 

competition. Mem. Cogn. 43 , 432 –440 (2015). 

9. Pan, Y., Cheng, Q. P. & Luo, Q. Y. Working memory can enhance unconscious visual 

perception. sychon. Bull. ev. 19 , 477 –482 (2012). 

10. Dosher, B. A. & Lu, Z. L. Noise exclusion in spatial attention. sychol. ci. 11 , 139 –146 (2000). 

11. Pan, Y. & Zhang, X. Visual working memory enhances target discrimination accuracy with 

single -item displays. ttention, erception, sychophys. 82 , 3005 –3012 (2020). 

12. Soto, D., Wriglesworth, A., Bahrami -Balani, A. & Humphreys, G. W. Working Memory 

Enhances Visual Perception: Evidence From Signal Detection Analysis. J. p. sychol. earn. 

Mem. Cogn. 36 , 441 –456 (2010). 

13. Carrasco, M., Williams, P. E. & Yeshurun, Y. Covert attention increases spatial resolution with 

or without masks: Support for signal enhancement. J. Vis. 2, 467 –479 (2002). 

14. Pan, Y., Luo, Q. & Cheng, M. Working memory -driven attention improves spatial resolution: 

Support for perceptual enhancement. ttention, erception, sychophys. 78 , 1625 –1632 

(2016). 

15. Padmala, S. & Pessoa, L. Motivation versus aversive processing during perception. motion 

14 , 450 –454 (2014). 

16. Hu, K., Padmala, S. & Pessoa, L. Interactions between reward and threat during visual 

processing. europsychologia 51 , 1763 –1772 (2013). 

17. Zhang, P. et al. High reward enhances perceptual learning. J. Vis. 18 , 1 –21 (2018). 

18. Serences, J. T. Value -Based Modulations in Human Visual Cortex. euron 60 , 1169 –1181 

(2008). 

19. Engelmann, J. B., Damaraju, E., Padmala, S. & Pessoa, L. Combined effects of attention and 

motivation on visual task performance: Transient and sustained motivational effects. ront. 

um. eurosci. 3, (2009). 

20. Cho, Y. T. et al. Reward and loss incentives improve spatial working memory by shaping trial -

by -trial posterior frontoparietal signals. euroimage 254 , (2022). 

21. Aul, C. et al. The functional relevance of visuospatial processing speed across the lifespan. 

Cogn. es. rinc. mplic. 8, (2023). 

22. Trés, E. S. & Brucki, S. M. D. Visuospatial processing: A review from basic to current concepts. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

Dement. europsychol. 8, 175 –181 (2014). 

23. Houpt, J. W. & Bittner, J. L. Analyzing thresholds and efficiency with hierarchical Bayesian 

logistic regression. Vision es. 148 , 49 –58 (2018). 

24. Kloosterman, N. A. et al. Pupil size tracks perceptual content and surprise. ur. J. eurosci. 

41 , 1068 –1078 (2015). 

25. Mathôt, S. Pupillometry: Psychology, physiology, and function. J. Cogn. 1, (2018). 

26. Purves, D., Monson, B. B., Sundararajan, J. & Wojtach, W. T. How biological vision succeeds in 

the physical world. roc. atl. cad. ci. . . . 111 , 4750 –4755 (2014). 

27. Yu, K., Vanpaemel, W., Tuerlinckx, F. & Zaman, J. The probabilistic and dynamic nature of 

perception in human generalization behavior. i cience 28 , (2025). 

28. Zhang, M. et al. Exploring the spatial working memory and visual perception in children with 

autism spectrum disorder and general population with high autism -like traits. o ne 15 ,

(2020). 

29. Sanna, F., Mahmut, M. K., Loy, F. & Masala, C. Editorial: Sensorial and perceptual 

dysfunctions as predisposing factors for the onset of depression. ront. eurosci. 16 , (2022). 

30. Cornsweet, T. The staircrase -method in psychophysics. m. J. sychol. 75 , (1962). 

31. Bruyer, R. & Brysbaert, M. Combining speed and accuracy in cognitive psychology: Is the 

inverse efficiency score (IES) a better dependent variable than the mean reaction time (RT) 

and the percentage of errors (PE)? sychol. Belg. 51 , 5 –13 (2011). 

32. Stephan, K. E., Penny, W. D., Daunizeau, J., Moran, R. J. & Friston, K. J. Bayesian model 

selection for group studies. euroimage 46 , 1004 –1017 (2009). 

33. Daunizeau, J., Adam, V. & Rigoux, L. VBA: A Probabilistic Treatment of Nonlinear Models for 

Neurobiological and Behavioural Data. o Comput. Biol. 10 , (2014). 

34. Park, H., Doh, H., Lee, E., Park, H. & Ahn, W. Y. The neurocognitive role of working memory 

load when Pavlovian motivational control affects instrumental learning. o Comput. Biol. 

19 , (2023). 

35. Rouder, J. N. & Mehrvarz, M. Random -effects psychophysics for studying individual 

differences in perception and cognition. sychon. Bull. ev. 33 , (2026). 

36. Engelmann, J. B. & Pessoa, L. Embedding reward signals into perception and cognition. ront. 

eurosci. (2010). 

37. Aston -Jones, G. & Cohen, J. D. An integrative theory of locus coeruleus -norepinephrine 

function: Adaptive gain and optimal performance. nnu. ev. eurosci. 28 , 403 –450 (2005). 

38. Urai, A. E., Braun, A. & Donner, T. H. Pupil -linked arousal is driven by decision uncertainty and 

alters serial choice bias. at. Commun. 8, (2017). 

39. Erdfelder, E., FAul, F., Buchner, A. & Lang, A. G. Statistical power analyses using G*Power 3.1: 

Tests for correlation and regression analyses. Behav. es. Methods 41 , 1149 –1160 (2009). 

40. Strasburger, H., Rentschler, I. & Jüttner, M. Peripheral vision and pattern recognition: A 

review. J. Vis. 11 , 13 (2011). 

41. Levitt, H. Transformed Up -Down Methods in Psychoacoustics. J. coust. oc. m. 49 , 467 –477 

(1971). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

42. Fong, Y., Rue, H. & Wakefield, J. Bayesian inference for generalized linear mixed models. 

Biostatistics 11 , 397 –412 (2010). 

43. Geisler, W. S. Contributions of ideal observer theory to vision research. Vision es. 51 , 771 –

781 (2011). 

44. Green, D.M & Swets, J. A. ignal detection and psychophysics . ew York: Wiley (1966). 

45. Kontsevich, L. L. & Tyler, C. W. Bayesian adaptive estimation of psychometric slope and 

threshold. Vision es. 39 , 2729 –2737 (1999). 

46. Aleci, C. & Rosa, C. Psychophysics in the ophthalmological practice —I. visual acuity. nn. ye 

ci. 7, (2022). 

47. Bishop. attern ecognition and Machine earning . attern ecognition and Machine 

earning (1971). doi:10.1007/978 -1-4615 -7566 -5. 

48. Penny, W. & Holmes, A. Random -Effects Analysis. in uman Brain unction: econd dition 

843 –850 (2003). doi:10.1016/B978 -012264841 -0/50044 -5. 

49. Gilzenrat, M. S., Cohen, J. D., Rajkowski, J. & Aston -Jones, G. Pupil dynamics predict changes 

in task engagement mediated by locus coeruleus. oc. eurosci. bstr. 515.19 (2003). 

50. Palaskar & Dang. How pupil tracks cognitive processes underlying internally - and externally -

directed attention tasks. in roceedings of the nnual Meeting of the Cognitive cience 

ociety, . (2024). 

# Supplementary Material 

# Perceptual threshold estimation 

Participant -specific perceptual thresholds were estimated using a double interleaved staircase 

procedure combined with psychometric fitting ( see Methods and Fig. S 1). Figure S 1A illustrates the 

trial sequence of the threshold task, whereas Fig. S 1B shows a representative psychometric fit from a 

single participant, demonstrating the increase in discrimination performance with increasing target 

duration and the extraction of the 70% threshold duration (ThrDur) from the fitted function. Across 

participants ( = 31), the mean threshold duration corresponding to 70% discrimination accuracy was 

142 ± 4 ms (mean ± SEM; Fig. S 1C). The mean central tendency parameter ( 𝜇 ), reflecting the location 

of the psychometric function along the duration axis, was 120 ± 2 ms , whereas the mean sensitivity 

parameter ( 𝜎 ), indexing sensitivity to changes in stimulus duration, was 26 ± 2 ms . These results 

indicate d reliable estimation of participant -specific perceptual thresholds for use in the main task. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

Figure S1. erceptual threshold task and psychometric threshold estimation. 

(A) Trial structure of the perceptual threshold task. Each trial began with a fixation period, followed by 

brief presentation of the Landolt stimulus superimposed on a blue circular cue at one of 16 peripheral 

locations. Participants reported the side of the target gap (left/right), followed by performance 

feedback. Target duration was adaptively varied using a double interleaved staircase procedure. (B) 

Representative psychometric fit (solid blue curve) and observed data points (blue markers) from a 

single participant, showing proportion correct as a function of target presentation duration. Dashed 

lines indicate the estimated target duration correspondi ng to 70% discrimination accuracy (144 ms) 

extracted from the fitted sigmoidal function, characterized by a central tendency parameter of  𝜇 

125 𝑚𝑠  and a sensitivity parameter of  𝜎 30 𝑚𝑠 . (C) Group -level mean values (bars; mean ± SEM) 

and individual participant data points for the psychometric parameters obtained from the threshold 

task: central tendency parameter ( 𝜇 ), sensitivity parameter ( 𝜎 ), and the estimated threshold duration 

(ThrDur; ms) corresponding to 70% discrimination accuracy. 

# ANOVA Tables 

A 3 x 3 repeated measures ANOVA on efficiency scores for 31 participants with Motivation (loss, gain, neutral) and WM 

(cued, uncued, mismatch ed ) as within -subject factors :

Table S 1. Post -hoc comparisons  for  efficiency score 

Factor 

(Motivation or WM) 

Comparison between 

levels 

Difference  Standard error  p-value 

Loss  Cued  - Uncued  0.19  0.06  5.58  x 10⁻ 3

Loss  Cued  - Mismatch ed  0.25  0.06  7.87  x 10⁻ 4Correct  

> i ation
> ms
> esponse
> ms
> s target gap on le or right
> eedback
> Correct or ncorrect
> ms
> Target
> ms

A B

C

> 125
> 30
> 144
> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Loss  Uncued  - Mismatch ed  0.06  0.05  0.51 

Gain  Cued  - Uncued  0.18  0.06  0.02 

Gain  Cued  - Mismatch ed  0.31  0.05  1.86  x 10⁻ 6

Gain  Uncued  - Mismatch ed  0.13  0.06  0.09 

Neutral  Cued  - Uncued  0.20  0.04  1.70  x 10⁻ 4

Neutral  Cued  - Mismatch ed  0.34  0.05  9.76  x 10⁻ 8

Neutral  Uncued  - Mismatch ed  0.14  0.05  0.02 

Cued  Loss  - Gain  -0.02  0.03  0.89 

Cued  Loss  - Neutral  0.19  0.05  6.16  x 10⁻ 4

Cued  Gain  - Neutral  0.21  0.04  3.36  x 10⁻ 5

Uncued  Loss  - Gain  -0.03  0.04  0.79 

Uncued  Loss  - Neutral  0.20  0.04  9.75  x 10⁻ 5

Uncued  Gain  - Neutral  0.23  0.05  2.53  x 10⁻ 4

Mismatch ed  Loss  - Gain  0.05  0.05  0.55 

Mismatch ed  Loss  - Neutral  0.28  0.05  2.71  x 10⁻ 5

Mismatch ed  Gain  - Neutral  0.23  0.04  1.49  x 10⁻ 5

A 2 x 2 repeated measures ANOVA on efficiency score for 31 participants with Motivation (motivation, neutral) 

and WM (cued, non -cued) as within -subject factors :

Table S2. Post -hoc comparisons for efficiency score 

Factor 

(Motivation or WM) 

Comparison between 

levels 

Difference  Standard error  p-value 

Motivation  Cued - Non -cued  0.23  0.04  1.05  x 10⁻ 5

Neutral  Cued - Non -cued  0.27  0.04  2.72  x 10⁻ 8

Cued  Motivation  - Neutral  0.20  0.04  1.  85 x 10⁻ 5

Non -cued  Motivation  - Neutral  0.24  0.03  2. 84 x 10⁻ 9

A 2 x 2 repeated measures ANOVA on accuracy values for 31 participants with Motivation (motivation, neutral) and 

WM (cued, non -cued) as within - subject factors: 

Table S3. Post -hoc comparisons for accuracy 

Factor 

(Motivation or WM) 

Comparison between 

levels 

Difference  Standard error  p-value 

Motivation  Cued  - Non -cued  6.20  1.95  3.45  x 10⁻ 3

Neutral  Cued  - Non -cued  7.98  1.82  1.30  x 10⁻ 4

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737658 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

Cued  Motivation  - Neutral  6.25  1.56  3.71  x 10⁻ 4

Non -cued  Motivation  - Neutral  8.03  1.51  9.56  x 10⁻ 6

A 2 x 2 repeated measures ANOVA on reaction times for 31 participants with Motivation (motivation, neutral) and 

WM (cued, non -cued) as within -subject factors: 

Table S 4. Post -hoc comparisons  for  reaction time 

Factor 

(Motivation or WM) 

Comparison between 

levels 

Difference  Standard error  p-value 

Motivation  Cued  - Non -cued  -0.04  4.85  x 10⁻ 3 6.39  x 10⁻ 9

Neutral  Cued  - Non -cued  -0.06  0.01  1.97  x 10⁻ 7

Cued  Motivation  - Neutral  -0.02  0.01  1.75 x 10⁻ 3

Non -cued  Motivation  - Neutral  -0.05  0.01  3.61 x 10⁻ 5