Title: Audo-Sight: AI-driven Ambient Perception Across Edge-Cloud for Blind and Low Vision Users

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.13668v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 00:55:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Audo-Sight: AI-driven Ambient Perception Across Edge-Cloud for Blind and Low Vision Users 

Jacob Bradshaw, Mohsen Riahi Alam, Bhanuja Ainary, Minseo Kim, Mohsen Amini Salehi 

Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, US jacobbradshaw2@my.unt.edu, mohsen.riahialam@unt.edu, bhanujaainary@my.unt.edu, minseo.kim@unt.edu , mohsen.aminisalehi@unt.edu 

Abstract —Despite advances in assistive technologies, Blind and Low-Vision (BLV) individuals continue to face challenges in understanding their surroundings. Delivering concise, useful, and timely scene descriptions for ambient perception remains a long-standing accessibility problem. To address this, we introduce Audo-Sight, an AI-driven assistive system across Edge-Cloud that enables BLV individuals to perceive their surroundings through voice-based conversational interaction. Audo-Sight employs a set of expert and generic AI agents, each supported by dedicated processing pipelines distributed across edge and cloud. It analyzes user queries by considering urgency and contextual information to infer the user intent and dynamically route each query, along with a scene frame, to the most suitable pipeline. In cases where users require fast responses, the system simultaneously leverages edge and cloud processing pipelines. The edge generates an initial response quickly, while the cloud provides more detailed and accurate information. To overcome the challenge of seamlessly combining these outputs, we introduce the Response Fusion Engine, which fuses the fast edge response with the more accurate cloud output, ensuring timely and high-accuracy response for the BLV users. Systematic evaluation shows that Audo-Sight delivers speech output around 80% faster for urgent tasks and generates complete responses approximately 50% faster across all tasks compared to a commercial cloud-based solution—highlighting the effectiveness of our system across edge-cloud. Human evaluation of Audo-Sight shows that it is the preferred choice over GPT-5 for 62% of BLV participants with another 23% stating both perform comparably. 

Index Terms —Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), AI agents, Edge-Cloud continuum, Context-Aware AI. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Assistive technologies aim to help Blind and Low-vision (BLV) individuals gain ambient perception, thus, they can perform their daily activities more efficiently and, in turn, can improve their independence and social inclusion. Despite re-markable advances in AI (particularly, LLMs) and computing systems in recent years, their structure and responses are not built for BLV individuals, hence, effective ambient perception continues to be a hurdle for people with BLV [1], [2]. Effective ambient perception often entails complex–and at times time-critical–interactions between users, their surround-ing environments, and assistive technologies. For example, consider a BLV user ordering food in a restaurant without time pressure: the user must locate the counter, explore the menu, place an order, and complete payment. In contrast, a BLV traveler running late at an airport faces a far more urgent Cloud 

> High -End
> Multi -Modal LLM
> (MLLM)

Edge  Smart Glass 

> AI
> MLLM

Fig. 1. Overview of the Audo-Sight framework that can provide conversa-tional ambient perception for BLV individuals. 

scenario, requiring rapid navigation to the correct terminal, identification of the departure gate, and timely completion of boarding procedures. Despite differing urgency levels, both scenarios share a fundamental requirement for conversational 

(aka active ) ambient perception , defined as the ability to deliver contextually relevant, query-driven responses grounded in both user intent and environmental cues. Supporting such tasks demands systems that can reliably manage interactions while adapting to dynamic temporal and situational con-straints. Recent advances in collaborative intelligence across the edge-cloud continuum offer promising opportunities to realize active ambient perception for people with BLV. These include the multi-agent AI (MAAI) systems for tasks such as face recognition and object detection [3], [4], the integration of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) for vision-language reasoning [5], and the progress in wearable assistive technologies across edge-cloud [3], [6]. Accordingly, the goal of this study is to investigate the challenges inherent in such interactive assistive settings and to propose edge–cloud–AI co-design solutions that enable timely, accurate, reliable, and context-aware interactions for BLVs. In particular, integrating multi-agent AI systems and MLLMs into a real-world assistive framework introduces a range of technical and design challenges, including latency management, coordinating heterogeneous AI models across compute tiers, reliable service availability, and edge energy efficiency (i.e., edge battery-life). To address these challenges, 

> arXiv:2603.13668v1 [cs.DC] 14 Mar 2026

we develop a smartglass-based and AI-driven assistive frame-work, termed Audo-Sight and shown in Figure 1, natively designed for BLVs. The smartglass is paired with an AI-enabled mobile edge system and a cloud backend. User queries about the surrounding environment are conveyed to Audo-Sight to be processed across edge-cloud and deliver context-aware and accurate responses while minimizing end-to-end latency and accounting for the unreliable network and edge energy constraints. The first challenge in developing Audo-Sight is to select an appropriate tier for deploying the AI models (either con-ventional AI or MLLMs). They can operate either on edge or cloud—each offering distinct advantages and disadvantages in terms of latency, accuracy, availability, energy consumption, cloud performance jitter and cost [7]. Choosing whether to run the system partially or fully on either tier poses a challenge that implies dealing with trade-offs across these factors. In a conversational system, BLV users ask questions to understand their surroundings. Based on the visual context of the surrounding and the query, the system must choose the most relevant AI agent to generate a response. In some cases, multiple AI models across edge and cloud can generate a response for the same user query with various accuracies and latencies. There is a need for a mechanism to fuse the responses from these different models, so that both real-time and accuracy desires of the user are fulfilled. Accordingly, the 

second challenge is how to seamlessly fuse the high-quality responses generated by the high-end AI models on the cloud with the low-latency edge response? Based on some semi-structured interviews we conducted with the BLV users of assistive technologies, we realized the 

third challenge of a conversational ambient perception system is to consider the urgency of the user query. For instance, consider the time-sensitive nature of responding to the query of a later traveler about the “direction to the departure gate” in the airport, as opposed to responding to a query about “the ingredients and calorie of a given food item” in the restaurant menu. In the former case, the user preference is a concise and fast response, whereas, in the latter one, the user desires a comprehensive and highly accurate response. Existing assistive tools often produce lengthy voice-based responses with unnecessary details, which are hard to keep track of (due to the sequential nature of voice [8]) and cause noticeable delays for the user decisions that sometimes can have serious consequences [9], such as an accident. Address-ing this challenge requires assistive systems to distinguish (based on the context) between queries that demand urgent, minimal, and quick response versus those that demand a more comprehensive response. In addition, our interviews with the BLV users also revealed that existing AI-based tools generate descriptions designed for sighted users, overlooking blind-friendly design and incorporating concepts with limited meaning for BLV individuals, such as references to visual attributes like color and verbs like “see” or statements like “follow the sign”. Audo-Sight addresses these challenges and enables BLVs to effectively perceive their environment through conversational interactions. To mimic perception abilities of sighted people, Audo-Sight employs methods to classify the incoming queries as either urgent tasks or non-urgent ones (aka normal tasks ); and offers fast-track and normal-track pathways to support latency-driven and accuracy-driven interactions. At the heart of Audo-Sight, there is a “Cognition Module” that includes a set of expert AI agents and MLLMs deployed within both edge and cloud working in tandem to achieve a high accuracy and low latency perception reliably (robust against transient edge cloud disconnections). Cognition Module equipped with methods that dynamically employs the underlying AI models to balance the responsiveness of edge with the high-accuracy offered by high-end processing on the cloud, thereby, minimiz-ing the latency without compromising accuracy for the urgent tasks, and maximizing accuracy for the non-urgent ones. For urgent tasks, we develop a mechanism that seamlessly fuses the rapid preliminary response from edge with a more accurate but slower response from the cloud to provide timely and reliable response to the user. This is very much like when a person responds quickly about an initial thought, while in the background of his/her mind prepares a more accurate response. Lastly, the generated responses must be adapted based on the perception capabilities of the users from the environment. As such, Audo-Sight is equipped with a method that can assure blind-friendliness of the generated responses. We have developed a prototype of the entire Audo-Sight framework (including the smartglass and the software platform across tiers), and curated a dataset of day-to-day images (taken by BLV users) and their pertinent urgent and non-urgent queries. These artifacts will be revealed upon acceptance of the paper. To conduct a comprehensive evaluation of Audo-Sight, we conducted both system-level performance assessments and a human-study using BLV participants. In sum, the key contributions of this study are as follows:  

> •

We develop Audo-Sight as an assistive framework with dge-cloud-AI co-design solutions that enable timely, ac-curate, reliable, and context-aware interactions for BLV individuals using both visual and audio contexts. Audo-Sight can identify urgent versus normal queries and route them accordingly across the continuum to fulfill both accuracy and latency desires.  

> •

We propose “Cognition Module” as the reasoning engine of Audo-Sight that dynamically utilizes various AI agents across edge and cloud to accurately and swiftly address the urgent and normal queries while accounting for lim-ited edge energy.  

> •

We develop a seamless edge–cloud response fusion mech-anism within Audo-Sight to dynamically merge fast edge responses with more accurate ones generated by the cloud. Thus, Audo-Sight can fulfill both the real-time and accurate assistance to the users.  

> •

We examined Audo-Sight with BLV human subjects and analyzed the accuracy, latency, and blind-Friendliness (accessibility) of the generated responses. While Audo-Sight is developed in the context of BLV users and assistive technology, many of its challenges and solutions are common across many other edge-cloud-AI systems and they can be adapted to be used for them. Specifically, this study addresses the broader challenges related to: The role of edge relative to cloud; Achieving accuracy and low latency in AI Fusion across edge and cloud; And transient disconnected operation of the edge. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews the relevant literature, while Sec-tion III describes the proposed solution and methodology of Audo-Sight. Section IV presents the experimental evaluation and BLV human study. Finally, Section V concludes the paper with a summary of the key findings. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Edge-Cloud Systems for BLV Accessibility 

Merchant et al. proposed methods for generating contex-tually relevant navigation instructions for BLV individuals and conducted an extensive investigation of their correctness and usefulness [10]. The authors constructed a dataset of indoor and outdoor images sourced from the VizWiz dataset [11] and introduced three instruction-generation methods and compared the resulting machine-generated instructions with human-authored instructions to establish a performance base-line. Accessible live and recorded video is crucial for enabling BLV users to engage in learning, work, and leisure. Bodi et al. [12] developed a video accessibility framework for BLV users. The framework consists of an AI-based module that generates inline or extended baseline descriptions to convey visual scene content, and another module that delivers extended, on-demand descriptions in response to user queries. Although the system employed AI models on both edge and cloud, it did not propose any solution for their arrangements or for results integration. Cheema et al. [5] proposed a user-controlled audio descrip-tion system designed to offer BLV users greater agency over the timing and granularity of AI-generated video descriptions. They employ GPT-4o [13] as its core AI model. It identifies the optimal timestamps for inserting descriptions and uses an AI-based description generation module on the cloud to produce initial descriptions for the corresponding video frames. Sridhar et al. [14] proposed NaviSense, a mobile assistive system that integrates conversational AI, VLMs, augmented reality, and LiDAR to support open-world object detection with real-time audio-haptic guidance. Unlike traditional pre-defined object detection approaches, it leverages an open-vocabulary VLM to detect objects described by user. To help users locate objects better, the system provides continuous audio cues and haptic feedback. Interaction is facilitated by a conversational interface powered by GPT-4o-mini [15]. The system employs lightweight edge-based models for text-to-speech and speech-to-text tasks, while the main AI tasks are handled by GPT-4o-mini and MoonDream 2B [16] Vision Language Models (VLM) on the cloud. NaviSense improves in object search performance and BLV user satisfaction— highlighting the potential of combining open-world perception, real-time spatial feedback, and conversational AI to enhance accessibility. WorldScribe [17] is a BLV-assistive solution that generates real-time, customizable, and context-aware visual descrip-tions across edge-fog via tailoring responses to the user’s intent. WorldScribe streams camera frames to the edge to be processed by lightweight AI models and LLMs and VLMs deployed on a GPU-enabled fog. While their results show user satisfaction in handling day-to-day tasks of BLV uses, they do not investigate fusion of responses from edge and cloud. 

B. Smart BLV Accessibility Products 

Be My AI [18] (previously Be My Eyes [19]) and Envision [3] are an AI-based assistive technologies that enables BLV users to submit images to a cloud-based LLM, and ask questions to further refine or contextualize the information. Microsoft Seeing AI [4] is designed to help BLV individu-als perceive and query about their surroundings using their smartphone cameras. The app supports a variety of daily tasks that are pre-routed based on their processing demands: Simple tasks (e.g., currency recognition) are processed on the device, whereas, advanced tasks (e.g., scene description) are processed on Azure cloud. Other products like TapTapSee [20] and Google Lookout [21] exist to help BLV users understand their surroundings through AI-powered camera analysis and some form of edge-cloud collaborative intelligence. Supersense [22] and Super Lidar [23] are assistive technologies designed to enhance environmental perception for blind and low-vision users. Su-persense uses AI and computer vision for real-time recognition of text, documents, currency, objects, and scenes, supporting everyday tasks and social interaction. Super Lidar comple-ments this by using LiDAR sensors to provide depth and spatial awareness through haptic and audio feedback, improv-ing navigation and obstacle detection. Together, they combine 2D visual understanding and 3D spatial sensing to increase independence, safety, and situational awareness for users with visual impairments. While these systems demonstrate a clear trend toward leveraging AI for BLV perception, they do not account for user urgency during interaction, nor do they support intelligent fusion of responses across edge and cloud tiers in a manner tailored to blind-friendly communication. III. A UDO -S IGHT : A M ULTI -M ODAL SMART ASSISTIVE 

TECHNOLOGY ACROSS EDGE -C LOUD 

A. Audo-Sight Architecture 

The bird-eye view of the Audo-Sight architecture is shown in Figure 2. The input device in Audo-Sight is a custom-designed smartglass that we developed to capture images (frames) from the surrounding environment along with the user’s voice query. Upon receiving the voice-based query, it is converted to text (denoted as Q) and paired with the pertinent frame (denoted as f ) in the Query-to-Image mapper of the Input Management module. The urgency of the user’s query can be identified either from the voice prosody or the text version of it. The (Q, f ) pair is then forwarded to the Cognition Module of Audo-Sight. The Cognition Module, one of the main contributions of this study, acts like the brain of Audo-Sight. At its kernel, we have the Reasoning Engine that consists of a set of lightweight 

expert (i.e., specialized) AI agents (e.g., Optical Character Recognition (OCR), facial recognition, and object detection) to handle specific queries) and heavy-weight MLLMs (to handle more general queries). The MLLMs are specifically spread across edge and cloud for two reasons: (a) dealing with the resource and energy limitations of the edge; and (b) assuring availability (reliability) of the interaction even in the face of network failures and cloud inaccessibility. Upon receiving 

(Q, f ) pair, the Query Router first detects the urgency of the query and accordingly routes it to the appropriate subsystems with the best-matching AI agent in the Reasoning Engine to handle the query based on the given visual context f .Once a response is generated by the Reasoning Engine, it is further processed and refined by the Response Management module, which include other major contributions of this study, before it is converted to speech. In analogy, this module is very much like the cognitive control of our brain that evaluates our thoughts before speaking them. The response refining process can include a wide range of actions. It can customize the raw response generated by the Reasoning Engine to become human-friendly and even blind-friendly via removing or al-tering the response to ensure effective communication with the user. Importantly, one aspect of Response Refiner, called Response Fusion Engine (described in III-D2), is in charge of seamlessly fusing responses generated by both edge and cloud tiers for the same query. This is to ensure communicating a fast response (generated by edge) and an accurate response (generated by cloud). 

B. Input Management Module 

The smartglasses used for Audo-Sight are 3D printed frames containing a Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W with a camera. The smartglass is connected to the Audo-Sight edge computing platform via WiFi or USB. When the user begins a query, triggered by an input button event, an image frame ( f ) is captured from the glasses’ video stream and transferred to the edge system via TCP. The frame, f , from the start of the interaction is analyzed along with the user’s voice recording. The textual query, Q, is extracted from the voice input via Whisper Speech-to-Text [24] engine. These two pieces of input data are paired together in the Query-to-Image Mapper component and sent to the Cognition Engine. Our evaluation focuses on the Audo-Sight edge-cloud processing using pre-captured images and datasets rather than the smartglasses. 

C. Cognition Module 

The Cognition Module consists of three primary compo-nents, shown in Figure 3. Upon receiving query Q, first, the edge-based Urgency Detector determines whether a user requires a rapid response and accommodates this by activating the “urgent track” subsystem in the Reasoning Engine and Response Management that offer faster response times. Sec-ond, the edge-based AI Router infers the intent underlying the user’s query, enabling the selection of task-appropriate AI models through routing. Finally, the Reasoning Engine 

comprises two sub-parts, the Expert AI Agents (on the edge) and the Generic AI Agents (on both edge and cloud) that together provide access to a range of generic and specialized AI models to efficiently generate accurate responses. In the following sections, we provide a detailed explanation of the methods developed for each one of these components. 

1) Urgency Detector: To craft an accurate urgency detec-tion system from the human language (i.e., the user queries), we fine-tuned all-MiniLM-L6-v2 [25] (aka MiniLM) sentence-transformers model using the SetFit framework [26]. We employed MiniLM because of its lightweight and edge-friendly design. We examined it against another popular model, called RoBERTa [27], that is used for similar pur-poses. Our evaluations showed that the F1 scores of MiniLM was slightly more than ROBERTA (0.94 vs 0.93). However, MiniLM far outpaced RoBERTa in terms of speed, with MiniLM processing queries more than twice as fast on the GPU and 4 times as fast on the CPU, which proves its edge-friendliness. To further increase the speed of MiniLM, we employed SetFit to tune the model based on an urgency training dataset that we crafted to train the MiniLM model for urgent queries. With the tuning, we could substantially reduce the urgency de-tection overhead from 30 milliseconds to only 9 milliseconds. The training dataset was created using requests from VizWiz dataset [11] for the non-urgent (normal) class, and altered versions with urgent phrasing to create an urgent classification category. Although only the urgent class is used for classifica-tion, including a normal category helps differentiate normal requests from urgent ones due to the contrastive learning technique [] employed by SetFit. The model is trained offline, and the resulting urgency detection model is loaded once at runtime on the edge to evaluate every query. A threshold value is set for the urgency category, such that a query is considered urgent if its estimated probability for the urgent class exceeds this threshold. Based on the initial evaluations of the system, we chose to set the urgency threshold to 0.3 in the experiments. 

2) AI Router: The AI Router performs a secondary anal-ysis of the queries and uses the urgency detector output to determine the appropriate AI agent in the Reasoning Engine. For its decision making, the AI Router employs a fine-tuned all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model; the same model that is used for Urgency Detector. We argue that although using transformer-based methods generally implies more overhead in the system design, however, it avoids developing and deploying mul-tiple solutions (e.g., one for urgency detector and one for AI routing). Hence, it can simplify the system design and maintenance. The MiniLM model classifies queries into three categories: Face Recognition, OCR, and Object Detection that we have so far implemented for the Reasoning Engine. The probability Input Management  Cognition Module  Response Management 

Query -

to -Image 

Mapper 

Voice 

Input 

> (query &
> prosody)

Image 

Input 

Response 

Refiner 

Reasoning 

Engine 

(Expert AI -

Agents 

& Multi -modal 

LLMs) 

Query 

Router 

Text 

to 

Speech Fig. 2. A bird-eye view of the Audo-Sight architecture and its primary components Urgency 

> Detector
> Cloud MLLM
> Blind -Friendly
> Response Editor
> Edge MLLM
> Response Fusion
> Engine

Cognition Module 

Response Management Module Reasoning Engine 

> Facial rec
> OCR
> Object detect
> Facial rec
> OCR
> Object detect

Q  

> Generic Q
> Expert Q
> Query (Q) Text To
> Speech
> Urgent
> Track
> Normal
> Track
> Generic AI Agents
> Expert AI Agents (Edge)
> AI Router
> Frame (F)
> Audio
> Output
> Fig. 3. Internal mechanics of the Cognition and Response Management Modules of the Audo-Sight platform

estimate for the highest-scoring category is compared against a predefined threshold value (we set it to 0.86 based on our initial evaluations), and the corresponding route to Expert AI Agents is selected if this threshold is exceeded. The queries that do not meet the threshold are classified as generic request and are routed to the Generic AI Agents. In sum, as shown in Figure 3, for query Q, Urgency Detector and AI Router work in tandem to route it through one of the following four subsystems: Normal-track Expert, Urgent-track Expert, Normal-track Generic, and Urgent-track Generic. 

3) Reasoning Engine: The Reasoning Engine comprises two sub-parts: the Expert AI Agents and the Generic AI Agents . The Expert AI Agents are orders of magnitude faster than MLLMs and are responsible for generating response content from image analysis. In the Urgent-track, the generated response is directly delivered to the user; whereas, in the Normal-track, the response is sent to the Response Editor (in the Response Management module) for further processing and making it more blind-friendly. Within the Generic AI Agents part, both the cloud-based MLLM GPT-5 [28] and the edge-based MLLM Gemma3:4B [29] are employed to process the assigned (Q, f )

pairs and handle general queries (i.e., those which cannot be handled by expert AI agents). As there is no urgency associated with Normal-track Generic queries, they are only routed to the high-accuracy MLLM on the cloud. In addition to improving response accuracy, this preserves the edge battery lifetime and in case of a transient network failure, the user can resubmit the query (much like a best-effort request). The queries in the Urgent-track, however, are routed to both the edge and cloud MLLMs to be proceed more quickly and reliably (assuring a response in case of network unavailability). Because in this case two responses are generated for the same urgent query, there must be a subsequent method, called Re-sponse Fusion Engine in the Response Management Module, to seamlessly combine the high quality cloud response with the fast paced edge response. D. Response Management Module 

The Response Management is responsible for generating and delivering responses tailored to each track category and a Text-to-Speech (TTS) components that generates the voice output. As illustrated in Figure 4, the urgent responses gener-ated by the Expert AI Agents and normal responses generated by the Generic AI Agents are transmitted directly to the TTS module. In contrast, normal responses produced by the Expert AI Agents, together with the corresponding user queries, are first forwarded to the Blind-Friendly Response Editor for additional processing prior to TTS conversion. Furthermore, Urgent responses from the Generic AI Agents are routed to the Response Fusion Engine, where supplementary processing is performed concurrently as the responses are being passed to the TTS module. The subsequent sections provide a detailed description of each of these components. 

1) Blind-Friendly Response Editor: At times, the raw mix-ture of experts system outputs are not optimally user-friendly. This can be attributed to several causes: raw data wording problems, inaccuracies, or irrelevance. When considering the user query, the raw data wording may seem awkward or unresponsive to the user’s request. For instance, in response to the query: “Is there anyone I know here?” the raw facial recognition (an expert AI agent) data is “John Doe,” but a better response would be “Yes, John Doe is here.” Similarly, inaccuracies such as a missing character from OCR can be accounted for by this system. Some information in the raw outputs can be irrelevant to the user’s query, such as people listed in the object detection’s response to “What are these objects?”, these responses undergo editing through Blind-Friendly Response Editor by being given to an edge-side LLM along with the user’s original query. The LLM is prompted to answer the query using the results from the image analysis, and the output is streamed to the user. This component adds a notable latency overhead, so it is bypassed during urgent requests. In the future, this subsystem can be extended to enhance accessibility in the systems’ responses even further. During the system tests, we asked the BLV individuals how the system’s responses could be improved, and some of their suggestions could be implemented the Blind-Friendly Response Editor subsystem, though updated to have generic responses routed through it as well. The specific feedback is described in the Experimental Study/Evaluation section IV-C. 

2) Response Fusion Engine: The Response Fusion Engine works with the Cloud MLLM, Edge MLLM, and the Text To Speech system to provide a seamless transition from the low-latency Edge MLLM response to the more accurate, but slower cloud MLLM output. Given the lower accuracy Edge MLLM, mistakes are possible, and because the same image is evaluated twice by two independent systems, this can introduce redundant information. This component seamlessly fuses the two responses in real-time while self-correcting mistakes, and avoiding restating details from the more responsive analysis. This system is triggered during urgent, generic requests, and it leverages the simultaneous streaming of both the edge and t0 Query Received       

> t1Edge MLLM First Token
> t2Cloud MLLM Completed
> (edge stopped)
> t3Response Fusion Engine First Token
> Cloud MLLM Processing
> Fusion Engine Processing
> Text To Speech of Fusion Engine output
> Time
> Edge MLLM Processing
> t4Response Generation Finished
> t5Response Completion
> ...
> Text To Speech of Edge MLLM response
> Fig. 4. Schematic view of Response Fusion Engine. The edge MLLM processing is interrupted (red X symbol in the figure) once the higher quality cloud MLLM response is ready.

cloud MLLMs. As described in Algorithm 1, The Response Fusion Engine monitors the Cloud and Edge MLLMs and keeps track of which one begins generating first. If the Cloud generates first, then the edge is not needed because it is assumed that the cloud is more accurate, so in this case, as shown in Line 12 of Algorithm 1, the local is stopped and the cloud output is used instead. If the Edge begins streaming first, as shown in Line 17 and Fig. 4, the edge response is streamed to the text-to-speech engine’s queue, QTTS . Meanwhile, the cloud response is collected over time. When the full cloud response has been received, as denoted by t2 in Fig. 4, we prepare to run the Fusion Engine LLM. First, the edge MLLM is stopped to save resources, as shown in Line 22 of Algorithm 1, and the necessary inputs for the Fusion Engine LLM are collected. The inputs needed include the full Cloud MLLM response and the Local LLM response up to the word spoken at the time that the Fusion Engine LLM is predicted to start streaming, 

t3 in Fig. 4. The text to speech speaking speed in characters per second, c, and the predicted Fusion Engine LLM response time, rt, are used to estimate the index of the last character, 

p, spoken by the text-to-speech engine at the time when the Fusion Engine LLM will begin streaming its response. To ensure the output is seamless, and to account for an unusually late response, we set this estimation value at twice the approximate average response time of the Fusion Engine LLM as our average, 0.5 seconds, is shown in Line 1. The index is limited to the last index of the edge response, as shown in line 25, and is shifted to the last character of the preceding word in Line 27 to prevent mispronunciation of partial words. The response data following this character is truncated from QTTS in Line 28, and the Fusion Engine LLM is given the response generated by the edge MLLM up to character p along with the full Cloud MLLM response. In the prompt, the Fusion Engine LLM is told to continue from the partial Edge LLM response and to treat the full Cloud MLLM response as the ground truth, correcting itself where necessary. It is also instructed to leave out redundant information. IV. E XPERIMENTAL STUDY / E VALUATION 

Experimental design. We tested our system’s perfor-mance through both automated experiments with datasets, and Algorithm 1 Hybrid edge-cloud MLLM output streaming with real-time fusion for seamless text-to-speech  

> 1:

Input: c = 3.33 (characters/s for TTS), rt = 0.5

(estimated response-fusion latency)  

> 2:

t1 ← null ▷ time when Edge stream starts  

> 3:

t2 ← null ▷ time when Cloud stream ends  

> 4:

p ← 0 ▷ predicted number of characters spoken  

> 5:

QTTS ← ∅ ▷ TTS queue  

> 6:

REdge ← ∅ , RCloud ← ∅ ▷ stream buffers  

> 7:

Initialize two parallel MLLM workers:  

> 8:

ConcurrentStart (Edge MLLM ) 

> 9:

ConcurrentStart (Cloud MLLM ) 

> 10:

Wait for the first token from either worker  

> 11:

if first token arrives from Cloud MLLM then  

> 12:

Terminate (Edge MLLM ) 

> 13:

Append all Cloud MLLM tokens to QTTS  

> 14:

return  

> 15:

else if first token arrives from Edge MLLM then  

> 16:

t1 ← now  

> 17:

Append tokens to QTTS  

> 18:

Continue streaming from Edge MMLLM until the last token of the Cloud response is received  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

On Cloud MLLM last token:  

> 21:

t2 ← now  

> 22:

Stop (Edge MLLM ) 

> 23:

p ← (c ∗ (( t2 − t1) ∗ rt) − 1)  

> 24:

if p > length (REdge ) then  

> 25:

p ← length (REdge ) ▷ Limit fusion Edge response input to Edge response length  

> 26:

end if  

> 27:

p ← Last character of preceding word.  

> 28:

Truncate QTTS after the first p characters of REdge  

> 29:

F ← StartFusionEngineLLM  REdge [0 : p], R Cloud 

 

> 30:

On first token from the Fusion Engine LLM:  

> 31:

Append all Fusion Engine LLM tokens to QTTS  

> 32:

return 

through real-time interactions with actual blind and visually impaired experiment participants. 

A. Automated Experiments Setup 1) Dataset selection.: To assess and enhance the system’s question-answering capabilities and contextual comprehen-sion, we utilized the VizWiz dataset [11], which consists of photographs captured by BLV individuals and provides a realistic benchmark for evaluating the system’s ability to address the real needs of BLV users through visual question answering tasks. For our system evaluation, we created a cus-tom subset by selecting 200 images from the VizWiz dataset, with each image paired with two questions. To thoroughly evaluate the system’s performance across different domains, we categorized the image–question pairs into two groups: 100 pairs that are relevant to the Reasoning Engine’s expert AI agents, and other 100 pairs that are more general and unrelated               

> TABLE I EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR THE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF THE
> URGENCY DETECTION AND AI R OUTER MODULES .Module Accuracy Precision Urgency Detector 90.6% Urgent Task Normal Task 93% 87% AI Router 86.3% Object OCR Other 100% 100% 81%

to these experts and are instead processed by the Reasoning Engine’s generic AI agents. We further divided each group to explore different processing scenarios for both normal and urgent tasks. For half of the pairs, we generated questions in an urgent format, enabling the Urgency Detection module to identify and prioritize these tasks for faster processing via the fast-track pipeline. This approach allows for a comprehensive evaluation of the system’s adaptability to varying task urgency, as well as its ability to process pairs based on the queries’ context. 

2) Hardware Setup.: The Audo-Sight system, as depicted in Figure 3 and tested in the evaluation section, was imple-mented on a Windows 11 machine equipped with an Intel Core i9-10850K (10 cores / 20 threads), 32 GB of system RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 3080 Ti with 12 GB of dedicated VRAM. This GPU served as the primary accelerator for the local MLLM inference with Gemma3-4b, object detection with yoloe-v8l-seg-pf, and dense embedding extraction with the fine-tuned all-MiniLM-L6-v2. API calls were made on a 5G Wi-Fi connection in the region of North Texas. 

B. System Performance Evaluation 

In this evaluation, we assessed both the latency and accuracy of the proposed system. Through interviews with BLV users, we identified two primary factors affecting user satisfaction: system responsiveness(i.e., latency) and response quality. The goal of designing the Audo-Sight is to improve system respon-siveness while maintaining high response quality. The Audo-Sight ’s Reasoning Engine employs multiple AI agents and MLLMs operating across the edge–cloud continuum. For ur-gent tasks, BLV users expect concise and immediate responses, whereas for non-urgent tasks, BLV users may prefer more detailed yet succinct outputs. Response latency and quality for each task depend on how effectively the Cognition Module employs AI agents and MLLMs. Achieving this objective requires efficient task routing within the reasoning engine, which is enabled by accurate Urgency Detection and AI Router modules. An optimal solution would fully understand user queries and intents and route them to the most appropriate available AI engine. This, in turn, requires highly accurate urgency detection and routing decisions. To evaluate the per-formance of the Urgency Detection and AI Router modules, their outputs are compared against ground-truth dataset labels across the experimental run. Table I summarizes the accuracy and precision results obtained for the Urgency Detection and AI Router modules. Latency Evaluation. We measured two latency met-rics: First Token Latency (TTFT) and End-to-End Latency (Turnaround Time). TTFT is defined as the time elapsed until the first word of the response is received, while Turnaround Time refers to the total time required to receive the complete response. BLV users typically employ different text-to-speech applications with varying speech rates based on personal preference. Therefore, we excluded speech synthesis time and playback delays from our latency measurements to ensure a fair comparison. We present a comparison of TTFT and End-to-End Latency for both urgent and normal tasks across three systems: the proposed system Audo-Sight, a local MLLM, and a cloud-based MLLM (GPT-5 [28]). As shown in the Figure 5(a), the proposed system significantly reduces TTFT for urgent tasks, achieving approximately 80% improvements compared to the cloud-based MLLM. Similar performance gains are observed for normal tasks, where the proposed system improves TTFT by about 50% relative to the cloud-based MLLM. For both urgent and normal tasks, the local MLLM demonstrates lower TTFT, achieving reductions of 71% and 89% relative to Audo-Sight, respectively, and reductions of more than 94% relative to cloud-based MLLMs. The end-to-end latency of the proposed system is highly de-pendent on the end-to-end latency of the cloud-based MLLM. Considering the distribution of our experimental dataset, ap-proximately half of the tasks are processed through the MLLM pipeline, while the remaining tasks are routed to expert AI agents in the Audo-Sight system. For normal tasks not routed to expert AI agents, Audo-Sight relies on the cloud-based MLLM for response generation, resulting in no significant latency improvement compared to the cloud-based baseline. Similarly, for urgent tasks not routed to expert AI agents, the system also depends on the cloud-based MLLM to complete responses in the fusion engine. As shown in Figure 5(b), the average end-to-end latency of Audo-Sight is roughly 50% of that of the cloud-based MLLM, reflecting the partial routing of tasks to expert AI agents at the edge. For both urgent and normal tasks, the edge-only system exhibits significantly lower end-to-end latency, achieving reductions of 80% compared to Audo-Sight. However, for normal queries, Audo-Sight does not require any edge MLLM requests. In the case of urgent tasks, Audo-Sight requires 40% fewer edge calls compared to the edge-only system, leading to lower energy consumption on the edge. Additionally, as demonstrated in the next section, the accuracy results show that Audo-Sight generates more accurate responses compared to the edge-only MLLMs. Based on our observations, the difference between TTFT and end-to-end latency for tasks relying on cloud-based MLLMs is approximately 200 ms on average and is negligible. This is because measuring the exact model-internal TTFT (i.e., the moment the first token is generated inside cloud-based MLLM servers) is impossible. Instead, we measure the earliest externally observable TTFT, which is heavily affected by network transmission, batching, framing, serialization, and other sources of latency.  

> Fig. 5. (a) First Token Latency (TTFT) comparison for urgent and normal tasks across three systems. (b) Comparison of end-to-end latency for urgent and normal tasks across three systems.

Accuracy Evaluation. In question-answering systems, large language models (LLMs) can be employed to assess the quality of responses generated by multiple agents or models. In this study, we use LLMs as a scoring method to evaluate and compare the accuracy of three system-generated outputs. This approach requires a ground truth answer. Prior research [5], [10], [17], [18] has leveraged GPT as a robust MLLM in similar systems or studies. Consequently, we use our cloud-based MLLM, GPT-5, as the ground truth answer and evaluate how Audo-Sight and our edge MLLMs, Gemma3:4b respond to a specific user query in comparison. We selected GPT-5 as model to perform the evaluation and the process involves scoring each model’s response across four criteria: correctness (accuracy), completeness (extent to which key points from the ground truth are addressed), faithfulness (absence of incorrect or unsupported information), and clarity (organization and ease of understanding). Each criterion is rated on a scale from 1 to 5, and an overall score is derived, typically calculated as the average of the individual criteria ratings. Figure 6 presents the scores for both Audo-Sight and edge-based MLLMs. As shown, Audo-Sight outperforms the Edge MLLMs in terms of correctness, completeness, faithfulness, and overall scores. Fig. 6. Accuracy comparison of Audo-Sight and edge MLLMs responses across four metrics and their overall accuracy performance, with scores based on GPT-5 responses as the ground truth. 

However, Edge MLLMs achieve a higher score in the clar-ity criterion. This is because Audo-Sight provides responses without additional refinements in cases of urgency, which can affect the clarity of the output. 

C. User Evaluation (Human Study) 

Overview. To test how the system performs for BVI in-dividuals, we conducted an experiment with 8 legally blind participants, (aged 41-74, 6 female, 2 male; 6 with moderate or higher AI chat/voice assistant experience; 4 blind from birth). The experiment was performed virtually with pre-taken images from different environments and simulated situations to mitigate risks of real-world tests. The participants were asked to query the system as if they were in the given environment, and they provided feedback regarding the system’s responses. 

Procedure. Participants interacted with both our system and GPT 5 without knowing which one they were using. The participants entered their queries textually via a text prompt in our web app. The experiment was split into two situations, each of which involved three images in a sequence. This tested the system’s ability to help the user complete multi-step goals, which included finding the restaurant counter and ordering food from a menu in the first situation, or meeting with a traveling companion at an airport and catching aflight in the second. Each situation was completed by each participant twice; once with Audo-Sight and once with GPT-5 via OpenRouter. The system order was alternated for each participant to mitigate bias for or against the first system tested. After participants tested the system, the facilitating experimenter collected feedback from each participant re-garding the system’s design and trade-offs. The participants also offered potential improvements to the blind-friendliness Response Editor. 

Results. When directly comparing the two systems, partic-ipants clearly demonstrate a preference for our system, with 66% saying they preferred guidance from Audo-Sight overall compared to 15% who prefer GPT-5. The users cited response expediency as a large reason in the direct comparisons and in ratings of each individual system, which correlates with our system’s higher measured speed. Additionally, participants rated our system 15% more highly in message quality, saying that our system’s responses included enough detail rather ChatGPT  AudoSight  Both Performed Equally   

> 283

15% 62% 

23% 

# BLV Participant Guidance Preference 

ChatGPT Audo -Sight Both Performed Equally  

> Fig. 7. BLV Participant Guidance Preference: 62% of participants picked Audo-Sight when answering the question “Which system’s guidance did you prefer overall?”

than being too simple. When rating whether the system was sufficient for understanding the environment, on average, the participants rated the two systems to be equal in helping participants imagine the environment (4.1/5) and roughly equal in terms of clarity (Audo-Sight- 4.1/5; GPT-5 - 4.3/5). In the discussion following the testing, participants praised the real-time merging system, saying that a fast, self-correcting system is better than a slow one in spite of higher initial accuracy, and they also voiced approval of the ability to control this feature by use of urgent language. The participants also offered some feedback regarding the quality of the responses which could be addressed in future work. The Blind-Friendly Response Editor could be extended to accommodate subjective preferences concerning phrases such as “I see your point,” or “Look under your chair,” or preferences for when to describe colors and detailed visual appearances of things. Instructions such as “Follow signs indicating XYZ,” which rely on visual cues, can be avoided through a combination of the subtractive LLM-powered Blind-Friendly Response Editor and MLLM-prompting. Prompting combined with depth-sensors for distance information can be used to better describe the scene in relation to the individual with specific angles and distances to provide clarity (e.g., it is positioned at 2 o’clock, 5 feet away). Additionally, support for continuous updates would help the user maintain their trajectory during long, straight walks, which would be an improvement over “Walk straight” as any minor deviation will be amplified over significant distances. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we propose Audo-Sight, which represents a significant advancement in assistive technology for BLV individuals by integrating edge and cloud AI processing to provide timely, accurate, and context-aware conversational ambient perception. The system’s intelligent query routing, combined with multiple processing pipelines and the Response Fusion Engine, allows it to infer user intent effectively and generate responses quickly for urgent tasks while ensuring highly accurate and comprehensive outputs. Evaluations show that Audo-Sight outperforms cloud-based MLLMs, starting responses to urgent tasks approximately 80% faster and gen-erating complete responses about 50% faster across all tasks, with only a 25% decrease in response quality with respect to high-end cloud MLLM. Furthermore, because assistive technology is critical for BLV users and cannot rely solely on cloud connectivity, our Reasoning Engine leverages both edge and cloud AI agents. This ensures that even when the cloud is unavailable, the system can still operate reliably with only a minor decrease in response quality. Our future direction is to improve the accuracy of the urgency detector, making it more powerful to cover a wider range of queries, as well as to enhance the AI Router’s ability to better understand user intent and further improve overall system performance. We also plan to make the Response Manager more intelligent by improving the blind-friendly Response Editor according to the experiences of interviewed BVL individuals discussed in the User Evaluation. The Re-sponse Fusion Engine can also be improved by incorporating 2-way communication between the Fusion Engine and the text-to-speech engine for better prediction of the spoken character count. Another goal for our future design is to enhance the Reasoning Engine by incorporating additional expert AI agents and reducing reliance on cloud-based MLLMs through improved edge AI capabilities. REFERENCES [1] R. E. Gonzalez Penuela, R. Hu, S. Lin, T. Shende, and S. Azenkot, “Towards understanding the use of mllm-enabled applications for visual interpretation by blind and low vision people,” in Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser. CHI EA ’25. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3706599.3719714 [2] S. Bhagat, P. Joshi, A. Agarwal, and S. Gupta, “Accessibility evaluation of major assistive mobile applications available for the visually impaired,” ITU Journal on Future and Evolving Technologies , vol. 4, no. 4, p. 631–643, Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.52953/TNRV4696 [3] Envision Technologies, “Envision,” https://www.letsenvision.com, 2017, accessed: 2025-12-01. [4] Microsoft, “Seeing ai,” https://www.seeingai.com/, 2017, accessed: 2025-12-02. [5] M. S. Cheema, S. Elahimanesh, S. Martin, P. Fazli, and H. Seifi, “Describepro: Collaborative audio description with human-ai interaction,” in Proceedings of the 27th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility , ser. ASSETS ’25. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3663547.3746320 [6] E. Waisberg, J. Ong, M. Masalkhi, N. Zaman, P. Sarker, A. G. Lee, and A. Tavakkoli, “Meta smart glasses—large language models and the future for assistive glasses for individuals with vision impairments,” Eye ,vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 1036–1038, 2024. [7] B. Yi, X. Hu, Y. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Yang, and F. Wu, “Ecoagent: An efficient device-cloud collaborative multi-agent framework for mobile automation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/ CorpusID:278394644 [8] R.-C. Chang, C.-S. Hung, B.-Y. Chen, D. Jain, and A. Guo, “Soundshift: Exploring sound manipulations for accessible mixed-reality awareness,” in Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference , ser. DIS ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 116–132. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661556 [9] P. Slade, A. Tambe, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Multimodal sensing and intuitive steering assistance improve navigation and mobility for people with impaired vision,” Science Robotics , vol. 6, no. 59, p. eabg6594, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/ 10.1126/scirobotics.abg6594 [10] Z. Merchant, A. Anwar, E. Wang, S. Chattopadhyay, and J. Thomason, “Generating contextually-relevant navigation instructions for blind and low vision people,” in Interactive AI for Human-Centered Robotics (InterAI) Workshop @ Ro-MAN , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08219 [11] D. Gurari, Q. Li, A. J. Stangl, A. Guo, C. Lin, K. Grauman, J. Luo, and J. P. Bigham, “Vizwiz grand challenge: Answering visual questions from blind people,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2018. [12] A. Bodi, P. Fazli, S. Ihorn, Y.-T. Siu, A. T. Scott, L. Narins, Y. Kant, A. Das, and I. Yoon, “Automated video description for blind and low vision users,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser. CHI EA ’21. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451810 [13] OpenAI, “Gpt-4o system card,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2410.21276 [14] A. N. Sridhar, F. Qiao, N. D. Troncoso Aldas, Y. Shi, M. Mahdavi, L. Itti, and V. Narayanan, “Navisense: A multimodal assistive mobile application for object retrieval by persons with visual impairment,” in 

Proceedings of the 27th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility , ser. ASSETS ’25. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3663547.3759726 [15] OpenAI. (2025) Gpt-4o-mini: Openai’s compact language model. [Online]. Available: https://www.openai.com/gpt-4o-mini [16] M. AI. (2025) Moondream vlm. [Online]. Available: https://moondream. ai/ [17] R.-C. Chang, Y. Liu, and A. Guo, “Worldscribe: Towards context-aware live visual descriptions,” in Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , ser. UIST ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3654777.3676375 [18] Be My Eyes, “Be my ai,” https://www.bemyeyes.com/bme-ai/, 2023, accessed: 2025-12-05. [19] ——, “Be my eyes,” https://www.bemyeyes.com, 2015, accessed: 2025-12-01. [20] CloudSight, Inc., “Taptapsee,” https://taptapseeapp.com, 2013, accessed: 2025-12-04. [21] Google LLC, “Lookout – assisted vision,” https://support.google.com/ lookout, 2019, accessed: 2025-12-02. [22] Virtual Collaboration Research Inc., “Supersense,” 2020, aI-powered scanner and object explorer app for blind and visually impaired users. Accessed: 2025-12-10. [Online]. Available: https://www.supersense.app/ [23] ——, “Super lidar,” 2021, liDAR-based assisted vision app for locating people and objects. Accessed: 2025-12-10. [Online]. Available: https://www.supersense.app/product-page-superlidar [24] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and I. Sutskever, “Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04356 [25] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2019. [26] L. Tunstall, N. Reimers, U. E. S. Jo, L. Bates, D. Korat, M. Wasserblat, and O. Pereg, “Efficient few-shot learning without prompts,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.11055 [27] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692 [28] OpenAI, “Gpt-5 (version gpt-5) [large language model],” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-5 [29] G. Gemini Team, “Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11805