Title: Problem difficulty and waiting time shape the level of detail and temporal organization of visual strategies in human planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.19881v1

Published Time: Mon, 23 Mar 2026 00:52:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 49

Markdown Content:
# Problem difficulty and waiting time shape the level of detail and temporal organization of visual strategies in human planning 

## Mattia Eluchans 1 and Giovanni Pezzulo 1,* 1Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council, Rome, Italy 

> *

## Corresponding author: giovanni.pezzulo@istc.cnr.it March 23, 2026 

Abstract 

Planning entails identifying sequences of actions to reach a goal, yet we still have incomplete knowledge of how problem constraints —such as difficulty and available time— influence the visual strategies supporting plan construction, both in terms of coverage of the to-be-executed plans and its temporal organization. To fill this gap, we recorded participants’ cursor and eye movements in a multi-target problem solving task on a grid. We manipulated two orthogonal dimensions: problem difficulty, by introducing the novel construct of misleadingness —which measures how nodes’ distances on the grid diverged from their relative position along the solution— and waiting time —by allowing participants either to act immediately or wait before moving. We found that difficulty significantly affected both performance and gaze: harder problems reduced success rates, required more corrections and pauses, elicited longer pre-movement inspection that provided higher coverage of the to-be-executed plan, and more re-fixations. When participants could start immediately, they did so without fully consolidating their plan. This led to more pauses and backtracks, but also to more precise gaze-cursor alignment during execution, suggesting improved online control compensating for incomplete planning. With increased planning time, greater difficulty led participants to achieve a better temporal alignment between pre-movement visual inspection and cursor movement during execution. Overall, our results suggest that problem difficulty increases the visual coverage of the upcoming plan, whereas time availability shapes the extent of replanning during execution and determines whether gaze–path coherence emerges before movement or only during execution in difficult problems. 

Keywords: eye-tracking; planning; adaptive behaviour; temporal ordering; visual search 1

> arXiv:2603.19881v1 [q-bio.NC] 20 Mar 2026

# Introduction 

Planning can be defined as the cognitive process of generating a sequence of steps that leads to a specific goal (Newell et al., 1972; Hayes-Roth and Hayes-Roth, 1979; Mattar and Lengyel, 2022; Sacerdoti, 1974). While human planning has been studied since the origins of cognitive science, the process leading to the construction of plans—and the temporal sequencing of plan elements—is covert and hence remains difficult to access experimentally. As a consequence of this limitation, cognitive and behavioural studies often rely on indirect measures of planning processes. An influential approach, for example, uses reaction times as a proxy for planning time, linking it to the amount of information that has to be processed (Stone, 1960; Ratcliff, 1978; Fudenberg et al., 2019; Myers et al., 2022; Simonelli et al., 2025, 2026), or to the depth of the plan required to solve the task (Proctor and Schneider, 2018). Other approaches focus on characterizing the observable plans implemented by participants through model-based analyses (Campitelli and Gobet, 2004; Lancia et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2026; Kessler et al., 2024; Ho et al., 2022; Rens et al., 2023), and typically compare participants’ choices—either globally or step-by-step—with those of normative models and artificial agents. The increasing capabilities of artificial agents have further expanded the range of tasks for such comparisons (Allen et al., 2024; Velasco et al., 2025; van Opheusden et al., 2023). A complementary perspective focuses on how choice and planning dynamics unfold in time, by tracking participants’ movement (or cursor) kinematics during decision-making and problem solving (Barca and Pezzulo, 2012, 2015; Spivey, 2008; Spivey et al., 2005; Buc Calderon et al., 2017). In parallel, research in motor control identifies anticipation and coarticulation—changes to an action based on upcoming ones—as key markers of sequential planning in tasks that are routinized, instructed, or planned from scratch (Lepora and Pezzulo, 2015; Yoo et al., 2021; Reina, 2003; Eluchans et al., 2025b). Gaze behaviour can provide an even more direct proxy for sequential decision and planning processes (Lakshminarasimhan et al., 2020). Classic work shows that gaze is not merely reactive but actively supports upcoming behaviour in diverse tasks. For example, people pre -allocate attention along planned (manual) trajectories (Baldauf, 2018), and even distribute attention across multiple upcoming movement targets before any action begins, indicating parallel planning of sequential movements (Baldauf et al., 2006; Baldauf and Deubel, 2010). In everyday actions such as handwashing, a consistent portion of fixations is directed toward objects relevant only for future steps, revealing a robust “look -ahead” strategy (Pelz and Canosa, 2001). During the observation of grasping actions, people make anticipatory saccades to the object they infer the other person will grasp (Ambrosini et al., 2011; Donnarumma et al., 2017). In sports, skilled performers exhibit predictive eye movements tailored to the structure of the task—for instance, expert cricket batsmen generate early saccades to the ball’s bounce point to estimate trajectory and timing (Land and McLeod, 2000). Similarly, studies of driving, table tennis, and music reading demonstrate that gaze leverages a short -term memory buffer to anticipate action demands seconds before they occur (Land and Furneaux, 1997). Anticipatory gaze also reflects developing internal knowledge: as people learn statistical or rule -based structure in visual tasks, their fixation patterns gradually reorganize to mirror that structure, indicating that eye movements participate in active learning itself (Arató et al., 2024). Research on the 2emergence and detection of temporal ordering in gaze has largely examined how gaze behavior reflects temporal properties during visual search or perceptual tasks in natural scenes (Hoppe and Rothkopf, 2019; Yang et al., 2016; Wagner et al., 2023). Other work has focused on how gaze predicts physical movements, such as in ballistic interception tasks (Gerstenberg et al., 2017; Huber et al., 2004). Additional studies have investigated navigation tasks in which the exit was either unique (Najemnik and Geisler, 2005) or already known to the observer (Zhu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). Other studies reported that while low-level visual salience attracts fixations to regions of high contrast or conspicuity (Mannan et al., 1997; Itti and Koch, 2001; Parkhurst et al., 2002; Parkhurst and Niebur, 2003), task demands consistently override purely stimulus-driven guidance. For example, gaze patterns tightly align with behavioural goals across naturalistic contexts, enabling accurate inference of ongoing tasks and revealing structured, purposeful sampling of the environment (Rothkopf et al., 2016; Hayhoe and Rothkopf, 2011; Hayhoe and Ballard, 2005). Recent work further shows that gaze dynamics reveal the hierarchical structure of planning: during pre -navigation planning, gaze exhibits a broad-to-narrow search pattern, reduced saccades amplitudes, and increased fixations as subgoals are identified, with attention concentrating on map locations most critical for connectivity (Gordon et al., 2025). These gaze signatures track the emergence of hierarchical decomposition and predict planning success in complex environments. During multi -step physical problem solving, observers choose visual subgoals that minimize present and future cognitive costs, revealing a sophisticated integration of immediate demands with anticipated difficulty (Binder et al., 2025). In insight problems, gaze reveals key intermediate states of reasoning, predicting who will discover solutions and facilitating problem restructuring when attention is externally guided (Grant and Spivey, 2003). Despite these advancements, we still lack a complete understanding of how people assemble a temporally ordered sequence of actions (i.e., a plan) when facing novel and complex problems, how this process is reflected in gaze behaviour, and how it is influenced by task characteristics such as problem difficulty or time constraints. Various studies have reported that people avoid fully specifying their plans before acting; instead, they often begin execution based on an incomplete plan that is subsequently refined or revised (replanning) during action execution (Nuzzi et al., 2026; Lepora and Pezzulo, 2015; Maselli et al., 2023). However, it remains unclear whether this process is driven by specific properties of the planning problems (e.g., their level of difficulty), by additional constraints (e.g., time limitations), or whether it reflects a more general characteristic of human planning. Another aspect that is not well understood is the degree of coherence between the plan inferred from gaze behaviour prior to execution and the plan that is ultimately carried out. Gaze behaviour before and during execution is subject to different constraints—for example, the latter must guide (hand or cursor) movements and therefore needs to be coordinated with them (Eluchans et al., 2025b)—but their relationship is not well understood. This work addresses these questions by using eye movements before and during problem solving as a window to the internal structure of plan formation. For this, we evaluated participants on the ThinkAhead task (Eluchans et al., 2025a,b) while recording their performance and eye movements. In this two - dimensional graph - based path - finding task, participants must trace 3a route that from a given starting point visits a set of targets without passing twice over the same node. Given this re-visit inhibition, participants cannot simply move as fast as possible to reach all the targets, as a greedy strategy would likely lead them to a dead-end. Successful performance therefore requires some degree of planning. Problems were presented in two (counterbalanced) blocks: in one block participants could start moving and solving the problem as soon as it appeared on the screen; in the other block, they had to wait for 19 seconds before starting moving. Orthogonally, we manipulated a difficulty dimension, by introducing a property we called misleadingness —the cumulative mismatch between nodes position in the solution path and their graph-theoretic distance—while controlling for other task properties that are known to influence planning performance, such as solution length, number of sub-goals, or the size of the solution space. These manipulations allow us to evaluate how much of the plan’s structure can be inferred from gaze behavior, how much of its temporal organization can be recovered from it, and how these aspects change as a function of task difficulty and waiting time. 

# Methods 

## Participants 

For the experiment we recruited 28 participants (12 F, 16 M; mean = 29 ± 5y, Range = [19,42]) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. 

## Ethics statement 

All participants gave informed consent to our procedures which were approved by the Ethics Committee of the National Research Council. Participants were free to leave the experiment at any moment. 

## The task 

Participants completed 60 problems, each requiring them to find a path starting from a given (yellow) node and connecting all the 8 (red) coloured “rewards” on a (not-fully connected) grid, made by 54 nodes arranged in a 6 × 9 structure (see Figure 1 for example problems). Passing twice over the same node was inhibited, but it was possible to backtrack and unselect nodes by tracing back from last position. Each problem had to be solved within 60 seconds. The time countdown was shown top-right in the screen, as well as the number of problems remaining to reach the next block, the number of problems unsolved and the total score. The 60 problems were organized in two interleaved blocks, comprising 30 randomized problems each with the constraint that half were easy and half hard in each block. The specific easy and hard problems assigned to the first and second block were randomized. The time after which movement was permitted changed between blocks: in one block, participants could start moving as soon as they wished; in the other block, they were required to wait for 19 seconds before starting (a 4 second countdown, with a clear sound played each second, began after 15 seconds). The order of conditions was counterbalanced across participants. This led to a 2 × 2

4within-subjects design, with block (no-waiting vs. waiting) and problem difficulty (easy vs hard) as experimental factors. 

Figure 1: Comparison of representative easy and hard problem instances. Left to right: easy problem, easy problem with highlighted path, hard problem, and hard problem with highlighted path. Nodes indicate start (yellow), target (red), and other nodes (steelblue); the semi-transparent black overlay marks the selected path. 

## Problems selection and definition of problem difficulty (misleadingness) 

We selected a set of problems with the same number of nodes and rewards, and whose shortest solutions’ properties (solution length, number of turns, number of points where a deviation made the task unsolvable) took values in a very narrow set (Figure S1). The key dimension we manipulated was task difficulty, defined here by introducing what we called misleadingness : a novel path property defined as the cumulative mismatch between the graph-distance (number of links) between two nodes of a solution and the distance between their indexes within the solution. Formally, consider a map represented as an undirected graph G = ( V, E ), and let P =(p1, p 2, . . . , p n) denote the shortest solution path (i.e., the shortest sequence of nodes visiting all reward nodes from the start node). For each node pi ∈ P , we identify its forward neighbors : the set of graph neighbors that also belong to the solution and appear later in the sequence, 

N +(pi) = {pj ∈ P : ( pi, p j ) ∈ E and j > i }. (1) For each such forward neighbor pj , the temporal distance |j − i| measures how far apart the two nodes are in the solution ordering. A large temporal distance indicates that the neighbor, while spatially adjacent, is reached much later in the optimal path—making it a potentially misleading choice at that decision point. The node-level misleadingness of pi is defined as the sum of temporal distances to all its forward neighbors: 

m(pi) = ∑  

> sj∈N +(pi)

|j − i|. (2) 5The Misleadingness is then obtained by summing over all nodes in the shortest solution: 

M (P) = 

> n∑
> i=1

m(pi) =   

> n∑
> i=1
> ∑
> pj∈N +(pi)

|j − i|. (3) For this exploratory study we considered two range of values of this property (less than 10 

and more than 100 ), to be sure to have marked difference in difficulty output: Difficulty =

> 

easy if M (P) < 10 ,

hard if M (P) > 100 .

(4) Intuitively, a high M (P) indicates that the map contains many decision points where spatially adjacent nodes lead to distant segments of the optimal path. A navigator following a locally greedy strategy (visiting the nearest unvisited neighbor) would be frequently “misled” into suboptimal detours, making planning ahead essential for efficient navigation. Selected problems were also chosen such that the shortest solution was also the one having the minimum value of misleadingness. Examples of easy and hard problem, along with their solution, is in Figure 1. 

## Experimental setup 

We used an Eye-link 1000+ tracker (35 mm lens) in a chin-forehead rest desktop-mount configu-ration, set according to the producer indications: the chin-forehead support was kept at a fixed height such that the eyes of the subjects were approximately at 34 of the screen height. Subjects seated on a chair with adjustable height. The experiment was performed inside an isolated room with no source of light except the IR camera of the gaze tracker and the (LED) light of the screen where the task app as running. The IR-camera was placed at approximately 50 cm from the eye position of subjects, between the subject and the screen. 

## Experimental protocol 

Each participant was first shown the video tutorial and given the information about the structure of the experiment: (1) calibration; (2) validation; (3) 4 training problems; (4) 60 problems of the task. Participants were instructed that their total score depended on problem completion and the remaining time: the faster the completion, the greater the number of points they earned. An unsolved problem returned 0 points. The passage from the training block to the first block, as well as the passages from the first block to the second, and the end of the whole experiment, were indicated by a message on the screen. For each participant, a standard 9+1 points calibration for the eye tracking was performed at the beginning of the experiment on a grid overlapping with the area of the task problems. A 9+1-point validation was then performed for the eye tracking calibration, after which participants were asked to move as little as possible. The acceptance criterion for the calibration was the one suggested by the producer: a maximum error in calibration of 1 ° and an average error smaller than 0.5 °. Eye tracking sampling frequency was 2000 Hz. 6Mouse tracker data preprocessing 

The cursor position was recorded throughout the experiment at a sampling frequency of 60 Hz. These trajectories were used to reconstruct velocity profiles which, as reported in previous work (Eluchans et al., 2025b), exhibit a bimodal distribution: a first peak corresponding to extremely low velocity values and a second peak emerging during execution phases. Because this distribution varies across participants, we determined a participant-specific threshold separating the two peaks, defined as the first minimum in the velocity distribution between them. Pauses were defined as temporal intervals in which mouse velocity remained below this threshold for at least 100 ms. Based on this criterion, four possible events were identified within each trial: the pre-movement phase, pauses, the execution phase, and the backtrack phase (Figure 2). In the present paper, results related to the backtrack phase were excluded. 

## Eye tracker data preprocessing 

All gaze data were preprocessed before analysis to convert the raw eye - tracking signal into time - ordered sequences of fixations aligned with the task graph. Blinks, missing samples, and signal losses were removed, and fixations and saccades were identified using the EyeLink 1000+ default detection parameters ( cognitive configuration ). For each fixation, gaze coordinates were mapped onto the nearest graph node, with off - graph fixations (e.g., toward timer or score displays) labeled separately. If multiple consecutive fixations were performed on the same node, they were merged. 

## Repeat ratio (RR) 

To quantify the extent to which participants revisited previously inspected locations, we computed a Repeat Ratio (RR) for each trial phase. Let Nfixations denote the total number of fixations in the phase, and Nunique the number of distinct graph nodes that were fixated at least once. The repeat ratio is then defined as: 

RR = 1 − Nunique 

Nfixations 

.

Values range from 0 to 1, where RR = 0 indicates that all fixations fell on different nodes (maximal diversity), and values approaching 1 indicate a high prevalence of re-fixations on previously viewed nodes. This measure provides a simple, phase-specific index of how much gaze behaviour involves returning to the same elements of the map. 

## Measures for gaze and path comparison 

For the purpose of comparing gaze and path implementation, we projected cursor trajectories into the same space as the fixations by collapsing them into a discrete sequence of selected (or unselected) nodes. In both cases, the sequence of nodes was identified by the identity of the closest node being fixated (or crossed) and by the node’s relative position within the sequence. Let P = ( p1, p 2, . . . , p N ) denote a reference path and let S = {s1, s 2, . . . , s K } be a sequence of fixations. We characterized the relation between S and P with two main properties: (1) how 7Figure 2: Representation of a typical task progression. At first the problem is presented on the screen (Initial graph), and there is a phase were participants scan the map, ideally, looking for a solution (Before movement). A partial path is implemented (Forward execution), until a mistake is recognized and the implementation is stopped, replaced by another problem scan (Pause). The error is corrected tracing back some steps (Backtrack; unselected nodes are partially shaded) and, finally, the correct solution is implemented (Complete solution). 8Figure 3: Visual representation of different levels of coverage (left) and coherence (right). From left to right: high coverage (many of the path nodes are fixated); low coverage (few nodes being fixated); high coherence (transitions between fixations "follow" the path direction, preserving reciprocal ranking within the sequence); low coherence (fixations are on the same nodes as the high coherence case, but their order is different from the one implemented by in the path). many of the fixations belonged to the path ( coverage ), or vice versa, and (2) how many of the transitions between consecutive fixations were present in the path ( coherence ). Formally, the coverage of S with respect to P is: 

Cov( S, P) = | S ∩ P | | P | , (5) i.e. the fraction of path nodes being fixated. Note that this definition is not symmetrical, and the coverage of the path provided by the fixations is (in principle) different from the coverage of the fixations provided by the path. To define the coherence of fixations with respect to the reference path, let’s denote the set of ordered couples of nodes C(P) = {(pi, p j )}j>i along the reference path, and T (S) = 

{(si, s i+1 )}k−1 

> i=1

the set of transitions between consecutive fixations in a sequence. Note that the reason we did not compare the transitions between consecutive fixations with the transitions between consecutive nodes in the path, is that gaze does not usually fixate on every single node of the (to be) implemented path. Thus, considering only adjacent nodes as contributing to the order would lead to artificially low values of coherence. While the direction of the implementation of the path is enforced by a given starting point, fixations direction is (in principle) arbitrary. Thus, when comparing the order of the twos sets, we considered both the original sequence of fixations and its reversed. The final coherence will be the maximum value between the two comparisons, obtained as: 

Coh( S, P) = | T (S) ∩ C (P) || T (S) | (6) Similarly to coverage, also coherence is a non symmetrical property. Figure 3 provides a visual representation of high/low coverage/coherence examples. 9Clustering fixations into sequences 

Despite fixations during a trial are collected as an uninterrupted stream, these can be divided into four sets, by considering when they occur within a trial, as described in Figure 2. These are the initial planning phase (before any movement happens) were participant scans the problem; the (forward) execution phase, where participants begin a path implementation; the (possible set of) pauses during the execution phase, where the gaze scans the map but no path is implemented; and the (occasional) backtracks, where participants trace back the path they already implemented, partially, or completely. This first coarse-grained categorization can be further refined under the assumption that —especially at the beginning and during pauses—multiple plans can be evaluated and gazed at (e.g. partial plans that are discarded; plans to a specific sub-goal or related to distinct parts of the solution; different map areas inspection, etc.). Because gaze alone does not provide explicit cues about shifts from one putative plan to another, we needed a principled method to infer latent sub-structure within the fixation stream. Our goal was to cluster together with higher probability fixations that are closer in time and/or closer in the (graph) space, under the assumption that these fixations would be more likely to belong to the same (provisional) plan. Additional desiderata include accommodating the possibility that alternative plans are evaluated in parallel (e.g., comparing “turn left” vs. “turn right”), that plan segments may partially overlap (e.g., junction points may mark the end of one partial plan and the beginning of another), and that the underlying ordering may not match the final execution direction (e.g., a sequence of nodes may be implemented as a path in the forward direction after being fixated in the backward direction). To accommodate for these properties we resolved to use the generative-embedded Chinese Restaurant Process (ge-CRP), defined in Maisto et al. (2016). The technical details of the clustering procedure are provided in the Supplementary Materials. 

## Combining sequences to reconstruct participants’ plans 

While the clustering method identifies groups of fixations that exhibit some form of spatio-temporal coherence, no single cluster is expected to describe an entire plan. Planning in this task is often fragmented: participants may inspect different sub -paths at different moments, evaluate alternatives, revisit earlier options, or interleave plan fragments with unrelated fixations (e.g., to visually check on the remaining time or score). As a result, the structure of the plan is typically distributed across multiple clusters, each capturing only a partial (and potentially noisy) slice of the underlying planning process. To reconstruct a more complete representation of the intended plan, we therefore combined clusters into a larger set of fixation sequences that best matched the subsequently executed path. We selected this combination S∗ by greedily adding sequences that maximized fixations coverage of a reference path, stopping at the smallest set size ( K∗) for which adding a further sequence does not increase coverage (or all sequences are exhausted). Formally, let’s indicate with ¯S = {S 0, ..., SM } the full set of sequences. A subset of K indexes of these sequences 

I = {i, j, ..., m } will identify a combination of fixations sequences indicated as S(I) = ∪i∈I Si.The optimal combination will be chosen as the one that: 10 S∗ = arg max 

> S(I)

{Cov( S(I), P)} subject to min |I| (7) In case of combinations of the same number of sequences that provide equal (maximum) coverage, we chose the one providing the highest coherence value. While the optimal coverage 

Cov (S∗, P) is invariant with respect to the order of addition of the sequences and the internal order of fixations, it becomes crucial for the coherence of the optimal combination Coh( S∗, P).To extend the coherence definition to the case of combinations of sequences, we simply need to account for the fact that—as in the single sequence case—the highest coherence can result from the original sequence Si, or its reversed rev (Si). Thus, we needed to consider all the possible 2K∗

combinations of directions for the sequences composing the (best) combination 

S∗. Note that since backtrack phases were excluded from the analysis, nodes unselected during backtrack were also removed from the reference path in all comparison. For the pre-movement phase the comparison is straightforward, and considers as reference path the (remaining) selected nodes from the whole implemented solution. For pauses and execution phases, the reference path consisted of the upcoming (selected) nodes. However, because these phases can occur after part of the plan has already been implemented, we prevented data leakage by calculating coverage only over the portion of the path that remained to be navigated at the onset of the phase. Thus, if during a pause a participant fixated primarily nodes that had already been visited, these fixations contributed minimally to the coverage of the upcoming path. Crucially, while pauses and pre-movement phases compare fixations with a path yet to be implemented, for the execution phase we compare the simultaneous (though asynchronous) fixations and nodes selection. 

## Mixed-effects models and mediation analysis 

To quantify the effects of task difficulty and waiting time condition on behaviour and gaze, we employed linear mixed -effects models (LMMs) and generalized linear mixed -effects models (GLMMs) (Bates et al., 2015). Mixed -effects models are well -suited for our design because they account for repeated measurements within participants, allow for participant - specific variability in baseline levels, and support flexible link functions appropriate for different outcome types (e.g., logit for success rates, log -count for the number of pauses and backtracks). For each behavioural and gaze-dependent measure, we modelled fixed effects of difficulty, waiting condition, and their interaction, and included random intercepts for participants to capture between - participant variability in overall responsiveness. When relevant (e.g., in models of behavioural errors), additional covariates such as the number of available solutions were included to control for residual structural variability across problems. To evaluate whether certain relationships were direct or instead mediated by changes in gaze behaviour, we complemented these analyses with sequential mixed - effects mediation models (Imai et al., 2010). In these models, difficulty served as the independent variable, gaze-related quantities (e.g., total number of fixations) as potential mediators, and path - representation metrics (coverage and coherence) as dependent variables. This framework allowed us to separate the direct influence of difficulty on planning quality from its indirect influence exerted through gaze allocation, while 11 still accounting for participant-level random effects and relevant covariates (such as the length of the reference path). Indirect effects were assessed using the product -of -coefficients approach and evaluated with Sobel tests and bootstrap confidence intervals computed via participant -level resampling. To test differences between distributions we used a (one tailed) t-test when normality assumptions held, while preferred the non-parametric Mann–Whitney U test in other cases (e.g., with bimodal distributions). Together, these analyses provided a principled way to isolate how planning difficulty affects performance both through and beyond its (linear) influence on gaze. 

# Results 

## Problem difficulty (misleadingness) increases the number of failures, errors and uncertainty 

We first tested whether participants showed a worse performance when solving problems with greater misleadingness—consistent with the idea that misleadingness can be used to index difficulty. Figure 4 (top-left) shows the success rate split by misleadingness (easy/hard) and waiting condition (no waiting/waiting). We used a general mixed-effects model (GLMM) to estimate the effect of different predictors (Table 1). Harder problems are less frequently solved, as shown by the significantly negative effect of the solution Difficulty on the trial success. On the contrary, the Block —i.e., wether it is the first or the second half of the experiment problems—is estimated to have a positive effect, suggesting the presence of some learning process through which participants improve their solving ability during the course of the experiment. We also included as success predictor the Number of solutions , as this was a property not directly controlled in the problems generation. We found a significant, though extremely mild (positive) effect. Overall, this analysis supports the interpretation of a solution misleadingness as a measure of task difficulty. Since the effect of the Waiting condition was not assessed as significant, enforcing a waiting time did not improve the success rate. A more refined analysis in this direction concerned the effect of the view time exceedance, defined as the time that participants waited before moving corrected for the forced delay (in the waiting condition). We performed a mediation analysis with sequential mixed-effects model (see Table S1), to identify if the view time exceedance mediated the effects of the experimental manipulations on the success rate. A sequential mixed - effects mediation analysis showed different patterns across the two manipulations. For task difficulty, the mediation via view -time exceedance was statistically significant but negligible: harder problems increased exceedance, which slightly reduced success, yielding a small negative indirect effect. Because the direct effect was large and negative and the total effect nearly identical, the mediation only modestly amplified the dominant direct effect. In contrast, imposing a waiting time markedly reduced exceedance, and exceedance again negatively predicted success, producing a positive indirect effect. Here, both total and direct effects were nonsignificant, reflecting an inconsistent-mediation (suppression) pattern. 12 Variables Predicting 

Success Rate log-odds Std.Err Statistic p-value Intercept 1.826 0.3332 5.480 4.3 × 10 −8 *** Block 0.5488 0.1282 4.282 1.9 × 10 −5 *** Difficulty −1.971 0.2224 −8.860 8.0 × 10 −19 *** Waiting −0.0778 0.1276 −0.6099 0.5419 

Number of solutions 0.0233 0.00758 3.066 0.0022 ** Table 1: Success Rate—Logistic GLMM (binomial). The inclusion of interaction W aiting ×

Dif f iculty was not estimated significant, so the final model discarded this contribution. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1,

> 0.1.

Figure 4: Difficulty comparison across easy and hard problems, split by waiting vs no-waiting condition. (Top-left) Mean success rate; error bars indicate ±1 standard error of the mean (SEM), computed across participants means. (Top-right) View time exceedance box plot. (Bottom-left) number of pauses box plot. (Bottom-right) number of backtracks box plot. Box plots show the median (horizontal line), inter-quartile range (box, 25th–75th percentile), and whiskers extending to data point within 1.5 ×inter-quartile range (IQR). Individual participant data points are overlaid with a random horizontal jitter. 

## Increasing problem difficulty induces longer view time 

Having established that participants were sensitive to difficulty (operationalized as misleadingness) at the performance level, we proceeded characterizing participants’ response to the experimental manipulations by modeling view time exceedance (Figure 4 top-right) with a linear mixed-effects model (LMM). In Table 2 the LMM reports significant effects for both waiting condition and task difficulty, though operating in opposite directions: relative to the no-wait condition, forcing participants to wait before moving significantly reduces the exceedance view time. Conversely, 13 misleading solutions lead participants to invest more time preparing to move compared to non-misleading ones. The significant negative interaction indicates that the additional viewing cost of difficulty is attenuated when a waiting period is enforced. Variables Predicting 

View Time Exceedance [ms] Estimate Std.Err z-value p-value Intercept 900 510 1.76 0.079 .Block 120 210 0.59 0.553 Waiting -3800 290 -12.91 < 2 × 10 −16 *** Difficulty 2040 280 7.15 8.40 × 10 −13 *** Difficulty × Waiting -890 420 -2.13 0.033 *Table 2: View Time Exceedance —Linear Mixed Model. Random intercept per participant. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1,

> 0.1.

## Task difficulty and time constraints jointly modulate backtracks and pauses 

We examined post-movement onset behavior, focusing on pauses and backtracks as markers of incomplete or erroneous planning. Variables Predicting 

Number of Backtracks log-count Std.Err Statistic p-value Intercept 0.2234 0.1010 2.211 0.0271 *Block −0.0763 0.0657 −1.161 0.2456 

Difficulty 1.290 0.0671 19 .207 3.3 × 10 −82 *** Waiting −0.4393 0.0723 −6.078 1.2 × 10 −9 *** View time exceedance −0.1087 0.0418 −2.600 0.0093 ** Table 3: Number of Backtracks—Negative Binomial GLMM (no interactions). Poisson overdis-persion ratio = 2.84; thus we chose to use the negative binomial as link function. View time exceedance is a continuous variable, so we standardized it by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation (SD) of the distribution; its coefficients thus refer to the increase of 1 SD instead of 1 ms. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2,

10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1, > 0.1.The GLMM estimated significant effects of difficulty, view time exceedance and waiting condition on the number of backtracks (see Figure 4, bottom-right; Table 3). In line with the semantics of difficulty, higher difficulty increased the number of backtracks, reflecting a greater need for corrections in more challenging problems. In contrast, view time exceedance significantly reduced the number of backtracks: spending more time inspecting the problem during the initial planning phase led to a performance that was less prone to corrections. Because we observed that harder problems elicit longer view times we explored the mediation path linking task difficulty, view time exceedance and number of backtrack. The mediation results indicate that opposing effects of difficulty and view times are not independent: harder problems exert a direct (disruptive) effect on performance, but it also elicited longer view times, 14 which in turn mitigated this effect (Table S2). Similarly, enforcing a time delay also (directly) decreased the number of backtracks, despite in this condition view time exceedance was itself reduced. A potential (and somewhat trivial) confound is that imposing a waiting period leaves less time in which backtracks can occur. However a control using a LMM on the density of the number of backtracks (over the remaining available time) confirmed that waiting condition retained its significance (Table S3). Variables Predicting 

Number of Pauses log-count Std.Err Statistic p-value Intercept 0.9719 0.0942 10 .314 6.1 × 10 −25 *** Block −0.2588 0.0522 −4.956 7.2 × 10 −7 *** Difficulty 1.078 0.0530 20 .329 7.1 × 10 −92 *** Waiting −0.4299 0.0574 −7.494 6.7 × 10 −14 *** View time exceedance −0.0470 0.0324 −1.452 0.1466 

Table 4: Number of Pauses—Negative Binomial GLMM. Poisson overdispersion ratio = 3.34. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1,

> 0.1.Finally, this pattern of results is partially shared with the GLMM description of the number of pauses (Figure 4 bottom-left; Table 4). The first significant difference is that the block has a significant dumping effect on the number of pauses, suggesting that there is a learning effect between the two halves of the experiment—already shown in the success rate analysis. On the other hand, the effect of view time exceedance is not significant anymore. As for the backtracks case we ruled out the possible confound of the (smaller) available time in the waiting condition fitting a LMM on the density (over time) of the number pauses, which reports the waiting condition as (highly) significant anyway (Table S4). 

## How task phase and experimental manipulations shape gaze allocation 

Having assessed the effects of the experimental manipulations on behavioural performance, we next characterized gaze behaviour. We first examined the properties of fixation targets to determine what participants looked at and how gaze allocation was influenced by task difficulty and the waiting condition. For each combination of these factors, the panels in Figure 5 display the percentage of fixations directed to each node category, separated across the three trial phases (before movement, pauses and execution). Fixation proportions were modelled using a GLMM with phase, waiting condition, difficulty, and their interactions as fixed effects, and a random intercept for participant (Table S5). We then conducted post -hoc analyses based on estimated marginal means (Table S6) to test ordered contrasts across phases. Specifically, for every combination of waiting condition and task difficulty, both steps in the contrast chain —Before movement > Pause and Pause > Execution—were consistently significant (asymptotic Wald z -tests with Holm - adjusted p - values). Fixations on the “other” (non -reward) nodes closely mirrored this pattern, showing the inverse ordering Before movement < Pause < Execution, except in the hard/waiting condition, where fixation proportions during pauses and execution did not differ significantly. In contrast, fixations on reward nodes showed a far more stable 15 Figure 5: Fixation distribution across navigation phases, node types, and task conditions. Each panel shows the percentage of fixations directed to different node types (columns: Start, Reward, Other) during three distinct navigation phases (rows: Before Movement = pre-movement planning, Pause = mid-execution pauses , Execution = forward navigation). The four panels represent all combinations of waiting condition (rows: Waiting vs No-Waiting) and difficulty level (columns: Easy vs hard). Color intensity represents the proportion of fixations ( 0 − 100% ), with darker blue indicating higher fixation proportions. Values are normalized within each phase-difficulty-waiting combination, summing to 100 % across the three node types. Errors are the standard error of the mean across all trials. pattern: no significant differences were detected across phases except during pauses in the waiting condition (both easy and hard), where fixation proportions were significantly lower. These contrast analyses highlight a substantial shift in gaze allocation across task phases: fixations on the starting node progressively flow toward the “other” nodes. The consequence of this attentional shift is that, during the pre - movement phase, fixations on reward nodes are disproportionately frequent relative to their structural prevalence in the map solution. For the shortest solutions (ranging from 32 to 35 nodes across problems), the expected reward - to -other ratio is roughly 1:3 —a lower bound, since all longer solutions increase this imbalance—yet in the pre -movement phase the observed ratio is closer to 1:2. During execution, fixation proportions approach those expected from uniform sampling along the solution path. Pauses tend to fall between these two extremes, except for the fact that in the waiting condition, rewards are fixated significantly less than in the other phases. 16 Harder problems induce a higher re-fixation rate 

Using the Repeat Ratio (RR), we quantified the proportion of fixations directed to previously viewed nodes. The distributions shown in Figure 6 reveal significant differences between easy and hard problems across all conditions. During the pre-movement phase, the RR is substantially higher for harder problems in both waiting conditions. In the non-waiting condition, the distribution is bimodal, with an initial peak near 0, likely reflecting quick-start trials characterized by very few fixations and virtually no re-fixations. Notably, these difficulty-driven differences persist after movement begins, leading to higher 

RR values for harder problems both during pauses and forward movement phases. 

Figure 6: Histograms showing the distribution of repeat ratio values (proportion of re-fixations on previously fixated nodes) split by waiting condition (rows), phase (columns), and task difficulty (colors). Blue represents easy trials, orange represents hard trials. Dashed vertical lines indicate mean values (—for Easy, -. for Hard). Each legend reports mean values and statistical test results comparing easy vs. hard difficulty: t-test for Before Movement/Waiting condition, Mann–Whitney U test for all other conditions. Significance codes: *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, . p<0.1, ns p>0.1. Size effects are reported with a Cohen’s d for the Before Movement/Waiting condition; a Cliff’s δ was used for all the other (strongly non-Gaussian) cases. A potential concern with interpreting these results is that harder problems elicited more total fixations. Since all problems contain approximately the same number of relevant nodes in their solutions, an increase in the number of fixations —while the number of unique fixated nodes remains bounded—would inflate the repeat ratio, even if participants’ re-fixation behaviour itself did not truly change. In other words, the higher RR observed for difficult problems could trivially arise from more fixations distributed over a comparable number of nodes, rather than reflecting a genuine shift in gaze dynamics. To address this, we ran a control analysis in which 17 we explicitly modeled the repeat ratio while controlling for the total number of fixations. Using a LMM model with total fixations as a covariate, we estimated the effects of difficulty and waiting condition on RR across phases. Crucially, the effect of task difficulty on RR remained significant in all phases and conditions (especially before movement; see Table S7), indicating that the increase in re-fixations for harder problems cannot be explained simply by a larger number of fixations. Instead, difficulty genuinely induces more back-and-forth fixation patterns, independent of overall fixation count. Enforcing the waiting time has a significant effect both before movement, when it encourages more scanning with increased revisiting, and during execution, when it leads to less repetitive gaze behavior. 

## Properties of the reconstruction of the upcoming path 

Once characterized the global properties of fixations patterns we proceeded analyzing how they could be arranged into sequences. Preliminarily, we computed the number and lengths of sequences inferred by the clustering algorithm, across trial phases, waiting condition and difficulty. The distributions in Figure 7, with relevant statistical tests reported in the legend, shows that enforcing a waiting time substantially reduces the number of sequences and their lengths in the pre - movement phase. Task difficulty manipulation, on the other hand is either non -significant or associated with extremely small effect sizes. Pauses, however, exhibit a different pattern: harder problems clearly elicit a greater number of sequences, although their length distributions remain indistinguishable. Finally, during the execution phase, harder problems again produce more numerous, but shorter, sequences. We next characterized how a sub-set of these sequences is selected for the best combination (in terms of reconstruction of upcoming paths; see Methods) by reporting: the fraction of sequences included; the fraction of fixations included; the fraction of all fixations landing on nodes belonging to the best combination; the direction distribution (forward vs reversed) of the sequences composing it. Aggregated data are shown as bar plots in Figure 8. We modelled these properties of the best combination via GLMMs using trial phases, difficulty and waiting condition and their interactions as fixed effects, and then evaluated the relevant estimated contrasts. In the pre - movement phase, both the fraction of selected sequences and the fraction of selected fixations were smaller for harder problems (Table S8, Table S9), and smaller when a waiting time was imposed. Harder problems exhibited an increase in the proportion of fixations on nodes belonging to the best combination, and this difference was comparable across waiting conditions (Table S10). Also the direction of pre -movement sequences differed by difficulty: sequences were less frequently forward -aligned in hard than in easy problems, but this difference was significant only in the waiting condition (Table S11). During pauses, the pattern for the selected fractions was similar: hard problems showed lower fractions of selected sequences and fixations than easy problems(Table S8, Table S9). In contrast, the fixation fraction during pauses did not differ between easy and hard trials in any of the waiting conditions (Table S10), and the direction distribution likewise showed no reliable differences across difficulty levels (Table S11). During execution, the fraction of selected sequences and the fraction of selected fixations were again smaller for hard than easy problems (Table S8, Table S9). The fixation fraction was 18 Figure 7: Distribution of the number of sequences and their lengths across all trials and participants. The distribution of (left column) the number and (right column) lengths of sequences identified by the clustering algorithm for each phase (Before Movement, Pause, Execution) for each waiting condition (Waiting vs. No-Waiting), and for the two difficulties (Easy: blue, hard: Orange). In each subplot the mean of the distribution is indicated by a different(ly styled) dashed line. A Mann–Whitney U non parametric test is performed on the mean of the distributions to test their differences. ∆ is the difference between the means. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1,

> 0.1. Size effects are reported with a Cohen’s d for the Before Movement/Waiting condition; a Cliff’s δ was used for all the other (strongly non-Gaussian) cases 19 Figure 8: Properties of the upcoming plan reconstruction. (Ordered from top to the bottom) Fraction of the sequences identified in each waiting condition, trial phase and problem difficulty that was used in the best combination. Error bars are the standard error of the mean for the aggregated trials. Fraction of fixations that were included in the best combination, for each phase. Fraction of fixations on nodes that were part of the best combination. Percentages of the optimal direction —with respect to the reference path direction—of fixations sequences composing the best combination. 20 higher for hard than for easy problems (Table S10). Finally, during execution, forward alignment was significantly higher for easy than for hard problems, and this difference was present in both waiting conditions (Table S11). 

## Direct and indirect effects of task difficulty on path reconstruction 

After identifying the combination of fixation sequences that best reconstructed the upcoming implemented path, we examined how task difficulty and available planning time affected two complementary aspects of planning: how much of the future path was represented (coverage) and how orderly this representation was (coherence). Figure 9 shows the distributions of these measures across the different task phases (pre - movement, execution, and pauses), separated by the two experimental manipulations (waiting condition and difficulty). Since harder problems have been shown to produce significantly more errors and corrections, the reference path used for comparison in this analysis is typically longer. To remove this confound, we first estimated—using an LMM—the effect of reference - path length on coverage and coherence, including participant -level random effects. We then subtracted these effects from the distributions. Figure 9 displays the resulting residuals. The results show that waiting time significantly increases the fixation coverage of the upcoming implemented path, specifically in the pre -movement phase. This is expected, as the pre -movement phase is generally longer when the time delay is imposed, allowing for a higher number of fixations. In contrast, the waiting condition has only a mild effect on coherence. To examine how task difficulty influenced planning patterns—while controlling for variability in fixation counts—we performed a mediation analysis. We decomposed the effects of task difficulty on coverage and coherence into direct and indirect components, with the latter mediated by the total number of fixations. This analysis also controlled for reference -path length to reduce bias arising from the longer paths typically associated with harder problems (Table S12, Table S13). Because the availability of planning time strongly modulated fixation behaviour, we fitted separate mediation models for the waiting and no -waiting conditions. We found that mediation patterns varied across measures (coverage vs. coherence) and across trial phases (before movement, pauses, and execution). Let us first consider the condition in which participants were required to wait through a time delay (Table S12). Consistent with previous results, participants were sensitive to task difficulty, even before moving. Specifically, harder problems elicited a greater number of fixations. This larger number of fixations increased the spatial coverage of the upcoming path but simultaneously reduced the coherence with which the path was scanned. The mediation pathway (Difficulty 

→ Total Fixations → Coverage) fully accounted for the increased coverage in harder problems, representing a complete mediation pattern. Coherence, on the other hand, showed a clear suppression pattern: although higher difficulty encouraged a more orderly mental representation of the path, the accompanying increase in fixations counteracted—and effectively balanced—this effect. These dynamics persisted during the pause period, suggesting stable planning - related patterns. During execution, no mediation was observed, and the relationship between task difficulty and total fixations was no longer significant. As in the planning phases, both coverage and 21 Figure 9: Distribution of coverage (left) and coherence (right) of the best fixation-sequence combination across trial phases and waiting conditions. The values are adjusted by the random effects (participants’ random intercept) and by the effect of the reference path length. The top three rows show the waiting condition; the bottom three rows show the no-waiting condition. Within each group, rows correspond to the before-movement, execution, and pause phases. Histograms show the distribution for easy (blue) and hard (orange) trials; dashed and dash-dotted lines indicate group means. Each legend reports sample size, mean values, mean difference (∆), the p-value is the total effect reported from the mediation analysis. Note that, when estimating coherence, we excluded best combinations of sequences containing fewer than 4 fixations, as they tended to produce inflated coherence values while providing an insufficiently informative description of the forthcoming path. 22 coherence were directly improved as task difficulty increased. However, while an increase in the number of fixations continued to enhance coverage, it also reduced coherence, resulting in an overall suppression of the total effect. Some of these patterns were preserved in the no -waiting condition. The major changes concerned coherence. In the pre -movement phase, coherence was no longer affected by either task difficulty or the increase in total fixations. During pauses, the overall pattern was similar, but the direct effect of difficulty weakened and became non - significant, although the mediation pathway remained intact. Finally, execution of harder problems was carried out with greater coherence than in the waiting condition. Summing up the main results of this section, difficulty was associated with higher coverage across phases, with coverage increases predominantly mediated by the total number of fixations in pre -movement and pauses, and accompanied by significant direct effects during execution. For coherence, significant direct effects of difficulty were evident in the waiting block (pre - movement, pauses, and execution) and in the no - waiting block during execution, whereas indirect effects via fixations were negative where significant (waiting: pre -movement and pauses; no -waiting: pauses), yielding marginal or non-significant total effects in those cases. 

# Discussion 

In this study, we asked how people form sequential plans to address novel problems, how the planning process is reflected in gaze behavior, and how it is influenced by task demands, such as problem difficulty and time constraints. To address these questions, we tested participants in a problem solving task requiring reaching multiple targets in a grid, without visiting the same node twice, and measured their performance and gaze behavior before and during task execution. We manipulated two factors: planning difficulty—defined as misleadingness , or the mismatch between nodes’ spatial proximity in the graph and their relative distance within the solution—and waiting time—by allowing participants either to act immediately or to wait before movement could begin. Our results reveal that, as expected, planning difficulty decreased success rate and increased the number of pauses and backtracks during execution. Enforcing a waiting time did not affect the success rate, but when participants could start immediately they made more pauses and backtracks, as if their initial plan needed more online revision. Interestingly, participants’ gaze behaviour was systematically influenced by task demands. Eye -movement analyses revealed that participants were sensitive to problem difficulty even before movement execution, as harder problems elicited longer pre - movement gaze inspection. This extra effort in the initial phase mitigated some of the difficulty -related disruptions, such as the number of backtracks (but not the pauses) during the execution phase. Furthermore, imposing a waiting time reduced the time participants spent visually inspecting the problem before moving (view time exceedance), suggesting that participants deemed the waiting time sufficient to form a plan—or they did not want to risk exceeding the task deadline. Between the first and the second half of the experiment, success rate increases and the number of pauses, a measure likely correlated with the uncertainty of the path implementation, reduces, suggesting 23 an underlying learning process happening throughout the experiment. Our analysis of the proportions of node types being fixated showed that gaze allocation was shaped more by trial phase (pre -movement, pause or execution) rather than difficulty and waiting condition. Before movement, participants fixated the starting node and the reward nodes disproportionately more than expected from a uniform sampling along the path; a pattern that vanished during execution, where the flow of fixations from the starting position to the other (non-reward) nodes, yielded the proportions expected from the structural composition of the solution. These dynamics highlight how different processes plan formation and plan execution are, each characterized by its own gaze patterns and statistical regularities. Pauses statistics were somehow in between the pre-movement phase and the execution. This could be consistent with the fact that during pauses, more than before moving, there is a more local low-level (re)planning rather than a global scanning or high-level planning. Re -fixation rates were strongly modulated by difficulty across all trial phases: harder problems were accompanied by more gaze revisits to previously attended nodes, even after controlling for the total amount of fixations. This suggests a genuine increase in back - and -forth sampling, possibly reflecting additional resources required to reduce uncertainty or address more problematic parts of the problem or subgoals (Donnarumma et al., 2016; Binder et al., 2025; Correa et al., 2023; Huys et al., 2015; Maisto et al., 2015; Sacerdoti, 1974). The temporal alignment of fixations with the future path—captured by coherence—revealed a dominance of forward order across all phases, but with a consistent minority of reversed sequences, which reduced in the execution phase, where the forward direction became dominant. This result complements the repeat -ratio analysis, indicating that revisiting behavior can proceed in either a forward or reversed manner relative to the future path. Especially in the initial planning phase of harder problems, the reversed proportion is consistently larger than in easier problems. This also highlights another important distinction between plan formation and plan execution: whereas execution unfolds in a carefully ordered and temporally precise manner, the construction of the plan’s relative sequence of elements follows the actual solution direction far less consistently. Across task phases, both task difficulty and the waiting manipulation consistently shaped how participants visually sampled the upcoming path. Mediation analysis allowed us to clarify the pathways and mechanisms underlying this adaptive planning process. Our results indicate that, during the planning-related phases in both waiting conditions, participants invest more cognitive resources—intended as an increase amount of fixations—to plan ahead, when problems are more challenging. By decoupling the direct effects of difficulty on the representation of the plan from the indirect effects mediated by the increased number of fixations, we uncovered several noteworthy patterns. Before movement onset, the increase in fixations fully mediated the increase in coverage. Coherence, however, reflected a tension between two opposing mechanisms. On the one hand, the direct (positive) effect of difficulty indicates that once participants recognize the greater challenge, their visual strategy attempts a more ordered construction of the upcoming path. On the other hand, the indirect effect mediated by additional fixations reduces coherence: although participants refine the level of detail of their upcoming plan, this refinement is achieved in a less 24 ordered manner. One interpretation is that sufficiently consistent visual sampling allows the plan’s sequence to be encoded without explicitly looking at each element in order. A similar pattern persisted during pauses, suggesting a stable form of planning behaviour across these preparatory phases. Notably, however, these pathways were consistently weakened when participants were free to initiate movement immediately, indicating that the availability of enforced planning time amplifies these adaptive mechanisms. In contrast, execution patterns in the free -to -go condition showed no evidence of mediation. Instead, task difficulty directly and consistently improved both the coverage and coherence of the upcoming path. A possible interpretation is that, because participants often begin moving before fully consolidating a plan, the demands of execution require greater online control to compensate for a less robust pre-movement representation. Taken together, these findings indicate that the level of detail and temporal organization of planning across task phases are shaped by both task difficulty and temporal constraints, such as waiting time. Difficulty led participants to invest more cognitive effort in the initial phase—here reflected by a visual exploration that covered a larger portion of the problem space—likely aimed at reaching a sufficiently confident plan. Time availability, in contrast, reshaped how this effort was distributed across phases: without a waiting period, participants began moving with a less consolidated plan, which resulted in more replanning—as indexed by pauses and backtracks—during execution, in line with previous findings (Eluchans et al., 2025a; Nuzzi et al., 2026; Ho et al., 2022). Imposing an initial waiting time encouraged participants to form a more consolidated (though not necessarily more accurate) plan and thus required fewer revisions during execution. It also supported a closer correspondence between the plan inspected before movement and the one implemented for difficult problems. In other words, increasing waiting time appears to redistribute cognitive effort across the trial, shifting it toward the pre-movement phase while reducing the disruptive influence of problem difficulty. Furthermore, our study reveals that planning and execution display distinct gaze signatures—both in how fixations are temporally ordered, with execution showing a much stronger forward alignment with the unfolding path, and in how gaze is distributed across node types, with execution -phase proportions more closely mirroring the solution’s structure. Another interesting aspect of the study is the effectiveness of the novel construct that we introduced—misleadingness—as a strong predictor of difficulty, above and beyond structural properties of the problems revealed by previous studies, such as solution length, number of subgoals, number of turns, number of solutions (Giannopoulos et al., 2014; Raubal and Winter, 2002; Eluchans et al., 2025a; Wiener and Mallot, 2003; Wiener et al., 2009; Kaller et al., 2012; Proctor and Schneider, 2018; Simonelli et al., 2025, 2026), which we kept nearly constant. Misleadingness quantifies how strongly the shortest plan diverges from the problem’s perceptual layout, such ah the physical proximity of nodes. Thus, high values of this construct expose a limitation of greedy planning strategies that implicitly assume “close in space, close in the solution”. When this mapping breaks, search slows, and planners must expend more effort to maintain the correct ordering—an interpretation which is consistent with both longer view times and more frequent re - fixations. The cost of deviating from a perceptual prior aligns with those theories of bounded rationality that posit the existence of a default policy—understood 25 as habitual behaviour or a behavioural prior—and define the cognitive cost of planning as the cumulative deviation from this default (Rubin et al., 2012; Piray and Daw, 2020; Todorov, 2006; Lancia et al., 2023). The effectiveness of misleadingness is also in agreement with hierarchical planning models that rely on clustering based on perceptual proximity (Pezzulo et al., 2018; Ribas-Fernandes et al., 2011; Solway et al., 2014; Tomov et al., 2020; Donnarumma et al., 2016; van Dijk and Polani, 2011), as a high misleadingness would render the clustering process suboptimal. This work has various limitations that could be addressed in future work. First, it would be important to assess how the present results generalize to other planning problems having different characteristics—including richer and more ecologically realistic tasks requiring sophisticated visual strategies (Maselli et al., 2023). Evaluating the effects of misleadingness and waiting time across a broader range of planning tasks may help provide a more general characterization of common strategies and pitfalls and inform future computational models of planning. A related direction would be to compare the effects of difficulty induced by misleadingness with those arising from structural properties of the tasks, which were held constant in the current study. Another related limitation concerns the planar, grid-like structure of the maps adopted in this study and their restricted size. The dense connectivity is beneficial as it plausibly favors a fine-grained planning process, but at the same it makes the tasks inherently cluttered, complicating efforts to decode underlying visual planning processes. Future developments might exploit other designs for planning problems that remove some of these obstacles. Several methodological limitations are also noteworthy, particularly regarding the clustering algorithm employed in this study. The algorithm was designed to reflect specific assumptions about how plans might be structured in this task and how such structures would manifest in gaze behavior. Its parameter validation relied on synthetic data and empirical considerations, making the approach top-down and supervised. This choice was motivated by the fact that, because planning (if present) is covert, there is no access to ground-truth plans or their corresponding gaze dynamics. The execution phase offers little insight in this respect, as planning and implementation appear to rely on different strategies. One promising direction for future work would be to evaluate multiple algorithms embodying similar assumptions about the plan-to-gaze mapping and examine how robust the results remain across methods. Finally, future work could record the brain activity of participants engaged in the task, to shed light on the neural underpinnings of the planning process. Previous studies have addressed how plan elements are represented in the brain of humans, non-human primates and rodents, across various brain areas, such as the frontal cortex and the hippocampus (Xie et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024; Mushiake et al., 2006; El-Gaby et al., 2024; Pfeiffer, 2020; Wikenheiser and Redish, 2015; Balaguer et al., 2016; Mattar and Lengyel, 2022). Understanding how brain dynamics unfold in the challenging problem solving setup that we addressed, and its relations with behavioral strategies, remain open objectives for future research. 26 Data and Script Availability 

Data and scripts used for the analysis of this work are stored at https://osf.io/dvrbu/ overview?view_only=692be9ee85b547babffa48f31d6a4c07 .

# Author Contributions 

Conceptualization: ME, GP; Methodology: ME, GP; Formal analysis: ME; Investigation: ME; Software: ME; Data Curation: ME; Writing - Original Draft: ME, GP; Writing - Review & Editing: ME, GP; Supervision: GP; Project administration: GP; Funding acquisition: GP. 

# Author Declaration 

We have no competing interests to declare. 

# AI-Use disclosure 

Authors declare that AI has been used for grammar, spell check and test revision in this work. Authors take full responsibility for the content. 

# Acknowledgments 

This research received funding from the European Research Council under the Grant Agreement No. 820213 (ThinkAhead), the Italian National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), M4C2, funded by the European Union – NextGenerationEU (Project IR0000011, CUP B51E22000150006, “EBRAINS-Italy”; Project PE0000013, “FAIR”; Project PE0000006, “MNESYS”), and the Ministry of University and Research, PRIN PNRR P20224FESY and PRIN 20229Z7M8N. The GEFORCE Quadro RTX6000 and Titan GPU cards used for this research were donated by the NVIDIA Corporation. 27 References 

Allen, K., Brändle, F., Botvinick, M., et al. (2024). Using games to understand the mind. Nature Human Behaviour , 8:1035–1043. Ambrosini, E., Costantini, M., and Sinigaglia, C. (2011). Grasping with the eyes. Journal of neurophysiology , 106(3):1437–1442. Arató, J., Rothkopf, C. A., and Fiser, J. (2024). Eye movements reflect active statistical learning. 

Journal of Vision , 24(5):17–17. Balaguer, J., Spiers, H., Hassabis, D., and Summerfield, C. (2016). Neural mechanisms of hierarchical planning in a virtual subway network. Neuron , 90(4):893–903. Baldauf, D. (2018). Visual selection of the future reach path in obstacle avoidance. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 30:1–12. Baldauf, D. and Deubel, H. (2010). Attentional landscapes in reaching and grasping. Vision Research , 50(11):999–1013. Baldauf, D., Wolf, M., and Deubel, H. (2006). Deployment of visual attention before sequences of goal-directed hand movements. Vision Research , 46(26):4355–4374. Barca, L. and Pezzulo, G. (2012). Unfolding visual lexical decision in time. PloS one , 7(4):e35932. Barca, L. and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Tracking second thoughts: Continuous and discrete revision processes during visual lexical decision. PLoS One , 10(2):e0116193. Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., and Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software , 67(1):1–48. Binder, F. J., Mattar, M. G., J. Kirsh, D., and Fan, J. E. (2025). Humans select subgoals that balance immediate and future cognitive costs during physical assembly. Cognitive Science ,49(11):e70135. Buc Calderon, C., Dewulf, M., Gevers, W., and Verguts, T. (2017). Continuous track paths reveal additive evidence integration in multistep decision making. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114(40):10618–10623. Campitelli, G. and Gobet, F. (2004). Adaptive expert decision making: Skilled chess players search more and deeper. ICGA Journal , 27(4):209–216. Chen, J., Zhang, C., Hu, P., Min, B., and Wang, L. (2024). Flexible control of sequence working memory in the macaque frontal cortex. Neuron , 112(20):3502–3514. Chen, T., Cheyette, S., Allen, K., Tenenbaum, J., and Smith, K. (2026). "just in time" world modeling supports human planning and reasoning. Correa, C. G., Ho, M. K., Callaway, F., Daw, N. D., and Griffiths, T. L. (2023). Humans decompose tasks by trading off utility and computational cost. PLoS computational biology ,19(6):e1011087. 28 Donnarumma, F., Costantini, M., Ambrosini, E., Friston, K., and Pezzulo, G. (2017). Action perception as hypothesis testing. Cortex , 89:45–60. Donnarumma, F., Maisto, D., and Pezzulo, G. (2016). Problem solving as probabilistic inference with subgoaling: Explaining human successes and pitfalls in the tower of hanoi. PLOS Computational Biology , 12(4):e1004864. El-Gaby, M., Harris, A. L., Whittington, J. C., Dorrell, W., Bhomick, A., Walton, M. E., Akam, T., and Behrens, T. E. (2024). A cellular basis for mapping behavioural structure. Nature ,pages 1–10. Eluchans, M., Lancia, G. L., Maselli, A., D’Alessandro, M., Gordon, J. R., and Pezzulo, G. (2025a). Adaptive planning depth in human problem-solving. Royal Society Open Science ,12(4):241161. Eluchans, M., Maselli, A., Lancia, G. L., and Pezzulo, G. (2025b). Eye and hand coarticulation during problem-solving reveals hierarchically organized planning. Journal of Neurophysiology ,134(3):985–997. PMID: 40839401. Fudenberg, D., Newey, W., Strack, P., and Strzalecki, T. (2019). Testing the drift-diffusion model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117:33141 – 33148. Gerstenberg, T., Peterson, M. F., Goodman, N. D., Lagnado, D. A., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2017). Eye-tracking causality. Psychological Science , 28(12):1731–1744. PMID: 29039251. Giannopoulos, I., Kiefer, P., Raubal, M., Richter, K. F., and Thrash, T. (2014). Wayfinding decision situations: A conceptual model and evaluation. In Duckham, M., Pebesma, E., Stewart, K., and Frank, A. U., editors, Geographic Information Science , volume 8728 of 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 221–234. Springer, Cham. Gordon, J., Chuang, J., and Pezzulo, G. (2025). Gaze dynamics prior to navigation support hierarchical planning. bioRxiv , pages 2025–01. Grant, E. R. and Spivey, M. J. (2003). Eye movements and problem solving: Guiding attention guides thought. Psychological science , 14(5):462–466. Hayes-Roth, B. and Hayes-Roth, F. (1979). A cognitive model of planning. Cognitive science ,3(4):275–310. Hayhoe, M. and Ballard, D. (2005). Eye movements in natural behavior. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 9(4):188–194. Hayhoe, M. M. and Rothkopf, C. A. (2011). Vision in the natural world. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science , 2(2):158–166. Ho, M. K., Abel, D., Correa, C. G., Littman, M. L., Cohen, J. D., and Griffiths, T. L. (2022). People construct simplified mental representations to plan. Nature , 606(7912):129–136. Hoppe, D. and Rothkopf, C. A. (2019). Multi-step planning of eye movements in visual search. 

Scientific Reports , 9:144. 29 Huber, S., Krist, H., and Huber, S. (2004). When is the ball going to hit the ground? duration estimates, eye movements, and mental imagery of object motion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance , 30(3):431–444. Huys, Q. J., Lally, N., Faulkner, P., Eshel, N., Seifritz, E., Gershman, S. J., Dayan, P., and Roiser, J. P. (2015). Interplay of approximate planning strategies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 112(10):3098–3103. Imai, K., Keele, L., and Tingley, D. (2010). A general approach to causal mediation analysis. 

Psychological Methods , 15(4):309–334. Itti, L. and Koch, C. (2001). Computational modeling of visual attention. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 2:194–203. Kaller, C. P., Unterrainer, J. M., and Stahl, C. (2012). Assessing planning ability with the tower of london task: Psychometric properties of a structurally balanced problem set. Psychological Assessment , 24(1):46–53. Kessler, F., Frankenstein, J., and Rothkopf, C. A. (2024). Human navigation strategies and their errors result from dynamic interactions of spatial uncertainties. Nature Communications ,15:5677. Lakshminarasimhan, K. J., Avila, E., Neyhart, E., DeAngelis, G. C., Pitkow, X., and Angelaki, D. E. (2020). Tracking the mind’s eye: Primate gaze behavior during virtual visuomotor navigation reflects belief dynamics. Neuron , 106(4):662–674.e5. Lancia, G. L., Eluchans, M., D’Alessandro, M., Spiers, H. J., and Pezzulo, G. (2023). Humans account for cognitive costs when finding shortcuts: An information-theoretic analysis of navigation. PLOS Computational Biology , 19(1):e1010829. Land, M. and McLeod, P. (2000). From eye movements to actions: how batsmen hit the ball. 

Nature Neuroscience , 3:1340–1345. Land, M. F. and Furneaux, S. (1997). The knowledge base of the oculomotor system. Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences , 352(1358):1231–1239. Lepora, N. F. and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Embodied choice: how action influences perceptual decision making. PLoS computational biology , 11(4):e1004110. Li, J., Watters, N., Sohn, H., and Jazayeri, M. (2023). Modeling human eye movements with neural networks in a maze-solving task. In Gaze Meets Machine Learning Workshop , pages 98–112. PMLR. Maisto, D., Donnarumma, F., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Divide et impera: subgoaling reduces the complexity of probabilistic inference and problem solving. Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 12(104). Maisto, D., Donnarumma, F., and Pezzulo, G. (2016). Nonparametric problem-space clustering: Learning efficient codes for cognitive control tasks. Entropy , 18(2):61. 30 Mannan, S. K., Ruddock, K. H., and Wooding, D. S. (1997). Fixation patterns made during brief examination of two-dimensional images. Perception , 26:1059–1072. Maselli, A., Gordon, J., Eluchans, M., Lancia, G. L., Thiery, T., Moretti, R., Cisek, P., and Pezzulo, G. (2023). Beyond simple laboratory studies: developing sophisticated models to study rich behavior. Physics of Life Reviews .Mattar, M. G. and Lengyel, M. (2022). Planning in the brain. Neuron .Mushiake, H., Saito, N., Sakamoto, K., Itoyama, Y., and Tanji, J. (2006). Activity in the lateral prefrontal cortex reflects multiple steps of future events in action plans. Neuron , 50(4):631–641. Myers, C., Interian, A., and Moustafa, A. (2022). A practical introduction to using the drift diffusion model of decision-making in cognitive psychology, neuroscience, and health sciences. 

Frontiers in Psychology , 13. Najemnik, J. and Geisler, W. S. (2005). Optimal eye movement strategies in visual search. 

Nature , 434(7031):387–391. Newell, A., Simon, H. A., et al. (1972). Human problem solving , volume 104. Prentice-hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Nuzzi, D., Cisek, P., and Pezzulo, G. (2026). Planning-while-acting: addressing the continuous dynamics of planning and action in a sequential embodied task. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .Parkhurst, D., Law, E., and Niebur, E. (2002). Modeling the role of salience in the allocation of overt visual attention. Vision Research , 42:107–123. Parkhurst, D. J. and Niebur, E. (2003). Scene content selected by active vision. Spatial Vision ,16(2):125–154. Pelz, J. B. and Canosa, R. (2001). Oculomotor behavior and perceptual strategies in complex tasks. Vision Research , 41(25):3587–3596. Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. (2018). Hierarchical active inference: a theory of motivated control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 22(4):294–306. Pfeiffer, B. E. (2020). The content of hippocampal “replay”. Hippocampus , 30(1):6–18. Piray, P. and Daw, N. D. (2020). Linear reinforcement learning: Flexible reuse of computation in planning, grid fields, and cognitive control. bioRxiv , page 856849. Proctor, R. W. and Schneider, D. W. (2018). Hick’s law for choice reaction time: A review. 

Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 71(6):1281–1299. Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological review , 85(2):59. Raubal, M. and Winter, S. (2002). Enriching wayfinding instructions with local landmarks. In Egenhofer, M. J. and Mark, D. M., editors, Geographic Information Science , volume 2478 of 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 243–259. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 31 Reina, G. (2003). Reina, g. a. & schwartz, a. b. eye-hand coupling during closed-loop drawing: evidence of shared motor planning? hum. mov. sci. 22, 137-152. Human movement science ,22:137–52. Rens, N., Lancia, G. L., Eluchans, M., Schwartenbeck, P., Cunnington, R., and Pezzulo, G. (2023). Evidence for entropy maximisation in human free choice behaviour. Cognition , 232:105328. Ribas-Fernandes, J. J., Solway, A., Diuk, C., McGuire, J. T., Barto, A. G., Niv, Y., and Botvinick, M. M. (2011). A neural signature of hierarchical reinforcement learning. Neuron ,71(2):370–379. Rothkopf, C. A., Ballard, D. H., and Hayhoe, M. M. (2016). Task and context determine where you look. Journal of Vision , 7(14):16. Rubin, J., Shamir, O., and Tishby, N. (2012). Trading value and information in mdps. In Guy, T. V., Kárný, M., and Wolpert, D. H., editors, Decision Making with Imperfect Decision Makers , volume 28 of Intelligent Systems Reference Library . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. Sacerdoti, E. D. (1974). Planning in a hierarchy of abstraction spaces. Artificial intelligence ,5(2):115–135. Simonelli, V., Nuzzi, D., Lancia, G. L., et al. (2026). Human foraging strategies flexibly adapt to resource distribution and time constraints. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience ,26:43–63. Simonelli, V., Nuzzi, D., Lancia, G. L., and Pezzulo, G. (2025). Structuring the environment nudges participants toward hierarchical over shortest path planning. Consciousness and Cognition , 134:103908. Solway, A., Diuk, C., Córdova, N., Yee, D., Barto, A. G., Niv, Y., et al. (2014). Optimal behavioral hierarchy. PLOS Computational Biology , 10(8):e1003779. Spivey, M. (2008). The continuity of mind . Oxford University Press. Spivey, M. J., Grosjean, M., and Knoblich, G. (2005). Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 102(29):10393–10398. Stone, M. (1960). Models for choice-reaction time. Psychometrika , 25(3):251–260. Todorov, E. (2006). Linearly-solvable markov decision problems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 19. Tomov, M. S., Yagati, S., Kumar, A., Yang, W., and Gershman, S. J. (2020). Discovery of hierarchical representations for efficient planning. PLoS Computational Biology , 16(4):e1007594. van Dijk, S. G. and Polani, D. (2011). Grounding subgoals in information transitions. In 2011 IEEE Symposium on Adaptive Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning (ADPRL) ,pages 105–111. 32 van Opheusden, B., Kuperwajs, I., Galbiati, G., et al. (2023). Expertise increases planning depth in human gameplay. Nature , 618:1000–1005. Velasco, P. F., Griesbauer, E.-M., Brunec, I. K., Morley, J., Manley, E., McNamee, D. C., and Spiers, H. J. (2025). Expert navigators deploy rational complexity–based decision precaching for large-scale real-world planning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122(4):e2407814122. Wagner, I., Henare, D., Tünnermann, J., et al. (2023). Humans trade off search costs and accuracy in a combined visual search and perceptual task. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics ,85:23–40. Wiener, J. M., Büchner, S. J., and Hölscher, C. (2009). Taxonomy of human wayfinding tasks: A knowledge-based approach. Spatial Cognition and Computation , 9(2):152–165. Wiener, J. M. and Mallot, H. A. (2003). ’fine-to-coarse’ route planning and navigation in regionalized environments. Spatial Cognition and Computation , 3(4):331–358. Wikenheiser, A. M. and Redish, A. D. (2015). Hippocampal theta sequences reflect current goals. Nature Neuroscience , 18(2):289–294. Xie, Y., Hu, P., Li, J., Chen, J., Song, W., Wang, X.-J., Yang, T., Dehaene, S., Tang, S., Min, B., et al. (2022). Geometry of sequence working memory in macaque prefrontal cortex. Science ,375(6581):632–639. Yang, S. C.-H., Lengyel, M., and Wolpert, D. M. (2016). Active sensing in the categorization of visual patterns. eLife , 5:e12215. Yoo, S. B. M., Hayden, B. Y., and Pearson, J. M. (2021). Continuous decisions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B , 376(1819):20190664. Zhu, S., Lakshminarasimhan, K. J., Arfaei, N., and Angelaki, D. E. (2022). Eye movements reveal spatiotemporal dynamics of visually-informed planning in navigation. eLife , 11:e73097. 33 Supplementary Materials 

## Maps structural properties 

Figure S1: Distribution of key structural properties of the map. Solution length denotes the number of nodes in the shortest path; fatal points are nodes along the shortest path from which any deviation renders the task unsolvable; number of turns is computed along the shortest solution. All measures have an upper bound equal to the total number of nodes in the map (54). 34 The clustering algorithm 

To infer the fixations latent structure while complying with these requests, we employed the generative-embedded Chinese Restaurant Process (geCRP) (Maisto et al., 2016). The geCRP defines a non-parametric clustering prior over the fixations. This variant generalizes the distance-based Chinese Restaurant Process to model-based similarity between those objects. To build this prior one needs to: (1) define a probability measure over the object (or over pairs of objects); (2) define a kernel function that maps the probabilistic representation of these objects into a similarity score space. Once defined this prior, a complete inference algorithm can be used to sample the fixations cluster assignments. 

A structure-sensitive algorithmic probability for pair of states. As done in Maisto et al. (2016), we turned to the Algorithmic Probability (AlP) framework and assumed that the joint probability of pairs of states in the graph of being produced together is given by the number of simple paths connecting them, each weighted by a factor that penalizes longer paths. 

P (si, s l) ∝ ∑

> k
> ∑
> j

2−(|ci(sk ,π j )|+|cl(sk ,π j | = ∑

> j

2−| ci(sl,π j )| (8) To comply with basic aspects of the task we filtered out all the paths where the starting node appeared in a path without being the start or the end. 

Kernel definition . The kernel is the function that maps the probabilistic representation of (pairs of) states into a similarity score space. We considered a function given by the product of two terms. The first one is: 

K(i, j ) = P (s(i), s (j)) 2 (9) Where s (i) and s (j) are the i-th and j-th node being fixated in the sequence, respectively. Nodes that are easily reached from others will have a higher similarity score. The second factor is given by: 

K (i, j ) ∝ exp (− | i − j| /τ ) (10) This will put together with higher probability things that close in the sequence. Note that the final kernel is symmetric. 

Collapsed Gibbs-sampling algorithm . The inference follows the standard dd-CRP framework, adapted to use the model-based similarity kernel instead of a distance function. Each state s (i) is associated to a latent variable (c(i)) indicating which other state it links to, and whose prior distributions is given by: 

p(ci = j|K, α ) ∝

> 

α if i̸ = jK(i, j ) if i̸ = j

(11) As in the standard CRP the concentration parameter α will be proportional to the probability of assigning an element to itself. The concentration parameter was scaled by the sequence length to avoid bias depending on extensive properties of the sequence. The partitioning into the clusters is a byproduct of the whole set of assignments: a cluster will be made by all the connected subset of states. The complete inference problem of clustering 35 is thus the inference of the posterior distribution of the assignments given the data. Despite the model evidence estimation make the direct evaluation intractable, we can easily define a collapsed Gibbs-sampling algorithm ans sample single assignment depending on their (analytical and tractable) conditional distribution of the other (frozen) ones. Operatively, at each step we remove a link a compute a new assignment conditioned on all the others according to the conditional probability distribution: 

p(cnew  

> i

| c−i, s 1: N , K, α ) ∝

> 

α if cnew  

> i

= i, K(i, j ) if cnew  

> i

= j does not join two clusters ,K(i, j ) Γ( s, z, G 0) if cnew  

> i

= j joins clusters k and l. 

(12) Where Γ is the ratio between the likelihood of the proposed cluster configuration obtained by merging together clusters k and l, with the likelihood of the configurations where k and l are disjoint. The likelihood of the observations in this model will be given by: 

Γ( s, z, G 0) = p(sz(c−i)= k∪z(c−1=l)|G0

p(sz(c−i)= k|G0)p(sz(c−i)= l|G0) (13) The likelihood of the observations in this model will be given by: 

p(sz(c1: N )= k|z(c1: N ), G 0) = ∑ 

> j̸=i

i ∈ sz(c1: N )= k 

> ∑
> i̸=i

K(i, j ) + 1 

nk + N (14) 

## Inference and clustering of the co-occurrence matrix 

The (collapsed) Gibbs-sampling algorithm provides us with putative assignment of fixations to clusters. By sampling multiple clustering configurations over time, once reached an equilibrium condition, we can build a co-occurrence matrix of the states. For our simulations we considered a total time of 1 04 steps, and 50 replicas of the inference state with randomized start. We used previous equation to determine the clustering with the highest likelihood in each replica. For each fixation sequence of length n, the co-occurrence matrix was transformed into a cosine similarity matrix through row-wise normalization. A distance matrix was then defined as distance = 1 − similarity . The i-th row of this matrix represents the distance between the i-th fixation and all other elements in the sequence, as induced by the inference algorithm and its underlying model. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering was performed using Ward’s minimum variance criterion, which identifies K clusters by minimizing the total within-cluster variance. Although Ward’s method is formally defined for Euclidean distances, empirical evaluation of the resulting clusters supported its suitability in this setting. The algorithm requires the number of clusters K to be specified in advance. To determine an appropriate value, we evaluated K from 1 to n and computed the clustering inertia for each case, defined as the sum of squared deviations of each point from its cluster mean, aggregated 36 across clusters. By construction, inertia decreases as K increases, with progressively diminishing gains. The elbow point —the value of K beyond which additional clusters provide negligible improvement—was identified as the first K for which the inertia fell below a fixed fraction (threshold ratio = 0 .1) of the maximum inertia observed in the sequence (i.e., at K = 1 when all the fixations are clustered together). This threshold was selected empirically based on experiments on both synthetic and real data and proved robust across varying sequence lengths. Empirically, some fixations were found to be spatially distant from all other elements in the sequence, resulting in near-zero similarity values. To detect such outliers, we computed the maximum pairwise similarity for each node; if this value was below an empirical threshold (maximum similarity threshold = 10 −5), the node was reassigned to a separate singleton cluster. This dual-threshold strategy —combining elbow-based model selection with explicit outlier isolation—balanced parsimony and clustering quality, preventing both over-segmentation and the inappropriate grouping of temporally or behaviorally distinct fixation patterns. Examples of clustering output on notable cases of fixations sequences are represented in Figure S2. 37 Clustering synthetic data 

Figure S2: Validation of the geCRP + elbow clustering pipeline on synthetic fixation sequences. Left: Map graph with fixation positions shown as eye icons, numbered by temporal order. Colored halos indicate cluster membership; arrows trace the scanpath. Nodes are colored by role (yellow = start, red = reward, blue = other); non-fixated nodes are faded. Right: Co-occurrence matrix estimated by the geCRP algorithm. Each cell (i, j ) encodes the proportion of MCMC samples in which fixations i and j were assigned to the same cluster (white = 1, black = 0). Colored bars along the margins indicate the final cluster labels obtained via the elbow method. Block-diagonal structure in the matrix reflects groups of fixations that are consistently co-clustered. 38 Problem difficulty (misleadingness) increases the number of failures, errors and uncertainty             

> a: IV →Mediator; c: total effect (IV →DV); c′: direct effect; a×b: indirect effect; b: Mediator →DV

IV Path Estimate Std.Err p-value 95% CI Difficulty a 0.3869 0.0541 1.3 × 10 −12 — *** 

c −2.635 0.2344 2.5 × 10 −29 — *** 

c′ −2.576 0.2357 8.6 × 10 −28 — *** 

a × b −0.0732 (2.8) 0.0315 0.0203 [−0.1494 , −0.0151 ] *Waiting a −0.7219 0.0559 2.8 × 10 −36 — *** 

c −0.1892 0.2947 0.5208 —

c′ −0.3204 0.3007 0.2867 —

a × b 0.1366 (-72.2) 0.0567 0.0159 [0.0298 , 0.2446 ] *Difficulty × Waiting a −0.1682 0.0788 0.0330 — *

c 0.1514 0.3298 0.6462 —

c′ 0.1156 0.3310 0.7270 —

a × b 0.0318 (21.0) 0.0198 0.1074 [0.00247 , 0.0731 ]View time exc. b −0.1892 0.0771 0.0142 — *Block (covariate) direct 0.5143 0.1362 1.6 × 10 −4 — *** 

Table S1: Mediation analysis: View time exceedance mediating the effects of Difficulty, Waiting, and their interaction on Success. Path a: LMM, random intercept per participant; paths c, c′, b:logistic GLMM with random intercept per participant (estimates in log-odds); a × b: indirect effect (Sobel test for SE/p-value; bootstrap 95% CI from cluster resampling); proportion mediated (a × b/c ) shown in parentheses. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2,

10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1, > 0.1.39 Task difficulty and time constraints jointly modulate backtracks and pauses             

> a: IV →Mediator; c: total effect (IV →DV); c′: direct effect; a×b: indirect effect; b: Mediator →DV

IV Path Estimate Std.Err p-value 95% CI Difficulty a 0.3869 0.0541 1.3 × 10 −12 — *** 

c 1.196 0.0477 1.3 × 10 −138 — *** 

c′ 1.231 0.0482 3.1 × 10 −144 — *** 

a × b −0.0443 (-3.7) 0.0107 3.5 × 10 −5 [−0.0676 , −0.0232 ] *** Waiting a −0.7219 0.0559 2.8 × 10 −36 — *** 

c −0.3835 0.0692 3.0 × 10 −8 — *** 

c′ −0.4499 0.0704 1.6 × 10 −10 — *** 

a × b 0.0826 (-21.5) 0.0175 2.4 × 10 −6 [0.0441 , 0.1203 ] *** Difficulty × Waiting a −0.1682 0.0788 0.0330 — *

c 0.0153 0.0787 0.8455 —

c′ −0.00215 0.0788 0.9783 —

a × b 0.0192 (125.6) 0.00979 0.0492 [0.00407 , 0.0384 ] *View time exc. b −0.1144 0.0226 4.0 × 10 −7 — *** Block (covariate) direct −0.0958 0.0336 0.0044 — ** 

Table S2: Mediation analysis: View time exceedance mediating the effects of Difficulty, Waiting, and their interaction on Number of Backtracks. Path a: LMM, random intercept per participant; paths c, c′, b: Poisson GLMM with random intercept per participant (estimates in log-counts); 

a × b: indirect effect (Sobel test for SE/p-value; bootstrap 95% CI from cluster resampling); proportion mediated ( a × b/c ) shown in parentheses. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3,

10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1, > 0.1.Variables Predicting Backtrack Rate (per time) Estimate Std.Err Statistic p-value Intercept 4.77 × 10 −5 5.54 × 10 −6 8.612 8.8 × 10 −12 *** Block 1.75 × 10 −6 3.21 × 10 −6 0.5438 0.5866 

Difficulty 5.88 × 10 −5 4.45 × 10 −6 13 .221 6.8 × 10 −38 *** Waiting −1.12 × 10 −5 4.76 × 10 −6 −2.360 0.0184 *View time exceedance −2.91 × 10 −6 2.01 × 10 −6 −1.446 0.1483 

Difficulty × Waiting −6.30 × 10 −6 6.40 × 10 −6 −0.9845 0.3250 

Table S3: Backtrack Rate (per time)—LMM. AIC = -25979.8 BIC = -25936.8. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1, > 0.1.40 Variables Predicting Pause Rate (per time) Estimate Std.Err Statistic p-value Intercept 1.23 × 10 −4 8.96 × 10 −6 13 .709 1.5 × 10 −17 *** Block −1.92 × 10 −5 4.36 × 10 −6 −4.416 1.1 × 10 −5 *** Difficulty 5.91 × 10 −5 6.03 × 10 −6 9.794 5.1 × 10 −22 *** Waiting −3.26 × 10 −5 6.46 × 10 −6 −5.054 4.8 × 10 −7 *** View time exceedance 4.04 × 10 −6 2.75 × 10 −6 1.470 0.1418 

Difficulty × Waiting 1.90 × 10 −5 8.67 × 10 −6 2.185 0.0290 *Table S4: Pause Rate (per time)—LMM. The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 <

∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1, > 0.1.41 How task phase and experimental manipulations shape gaze allocation 

START % Estimate Std.Err z-value p-value Intercept −2.1259 0.0541 −39 .2874 < 2 × 10 −16 *** Pause −2.3461 0.1479 −15 .8651 < 2 × 10 −16 *** Exec −4.2080 0.1966 −21 .4005 < 2 × 10 −16 *** Hard 0.1030 0.0502 2.0527 0.0401 *Wait −0.2022 0.0458 −4.4118 1.0 × 10 −5 *** Pause:Hard 1.2210 0.1585 7.7056 1.3 × 10 −14 *** Exec:Hard 0.8739 0.2251 3.8822 1.0 × 10 −4 *** Pause:Wait 0.6449 0.2043 3.1572 0.0016 ** Exec:Wait −0.0242 0.3032 −0.0797 0.9365 

Hard:Wait −0.0311 0.0597 −0.5205 0.6027 

Pause:Hard:Wait −0.5540 0.2216 −2.5006 0.0124 *Exec:Hard:Wait 0.1701 0.3453 0.4926 0.6223 

Table S5: GLMM Binomial — START Fixation Proportions (ref: Before Movement /Easy/ No waiting). The p-value significance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 ,

0.05 < . < 0.1, > 0.1.42 Waiting Cond. Difficulty Node type Contrast Odds ratio SE z-ratio p-value sig. NW Easy S BM > P 10.4492 1.5447 15.8736 < 10 −3 *** NW Easy S P > E 6.4361 1.5409 7.7772 < 10 −3 *** W Easy S BM > P 5.4824 0.7751 12.0357 < 10 −3 *** W Easy S P > E 12.5659 3.3708 9.4351 < 10 −3 *** NW Hard S BM > P 3.0814 0.1801 19.2535 < 10 −3 *** NW Hard S P > E 9.1082 1.0525 19.1174 < 10 −3 *** W Hard S BM > P 2.8136 0.1813 16.0505 < 10 −3 *** W Hard S P > E 8.6201 1.1698 15.8729 < 10 −3 *** NW Easy R BM / P 0.9425 0.0406 -1.3746 4.3 × 10 −1

NW Easy R BM / E 0.9544 0.0305 -1.4619 4.3 × 10 −1

NW Easy R P / E 1.0127 0.0392 0.3247 7.5 × 10 −1

W Easy R BM / P 1.0556 0.0477 1.1981 6.9 × 10 −1

W Easy R BM / E 1.0071 0.0249 0.2842 7.8 × 10 −1

W Easy R P / E 0.9540 0.0445 -1.0076 6.9 × 10 −1

NW Hard R BM / P 1.0832 0.0338 2.5614 3.1 × 10 −2 *NW Hard R BM / E 1.0531 0.0294 1.8553 1.3 × 10 −1

NW Hard R P / E 0.9722 0.0263 -1.0405 3.0 × 10 −1

W Hard R BM / P 1.1952 0.0355 6.0064 < 10 −3 *** W Hard R BM / E 1.0186 0.0233 0.8061 4.2 × 10 −1

W Hard R P / E 0.8522 0.0269 -5.0583 < 10 −3 *** NW Easy O BM < P 1.4442 0.0601 8.8366 < 10 −3 *** NW Easy O P < E 1.0601 0.0407 1.5228 6.4 × 10 −2 .W Easy O BM < P 1.4579 0.0641 8.5714 < 10 −3 *** W Easy O P < E 1.0352 0.0475 0.7531 2.3 × 10 −1

NW Hard O BM < P 1.4756 0.0435 13.1944 < 10 −3 *** NW Hard O P < E 1.1653 0.0307 5.8006 < 10 −3 *** W Hard O BM < P 1.5281 0.0432 14.9811 < 10 −3 *** W Hard O P < E 1.0048 0.0308 0.1555 4.4 × 10 −1

Table S6: Estimated marginal means contrasts. Acronyms: S=START, R=REWARD, O=OTHER, NW=No Waiting, W=Waiting, P=Pause, E=Execution. The p-value signifi-cance code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1, > 0.1.43 Harder problems induce a higher re-fixation rate 

Variables Predicting logit(Repeat Ratio) Estimate Std. z-value p-value 

Before Movement 

Intercept −2.802 0.1167 −24 .009 2.2 × 10 −127 *** Difficulty (hard) 0.4476 0.0995 4.501 6.8 × 10 −6 *** Waiting condition 0.4652 0.1242 3.745 1.8 × 10 −4 *** Difficulty × Waiting −0.4083 0.1395 −2.926 0.0034 ** Total fixations 0.0432 0.00224 19 .265 1.1 × 10 −82 *** Group Var (participant) 0.2005 

Pause 

Intercept −4.920 0.1369 −35 .929 1.1 × 10 −282 *** Difficulty (hard) 0.4054 0.1708 2.374 0.0176 *Waiting condition 0.1141 0.1861 0.6131 0.5398 

Difficulty × Waiting 0.1948 0.2440 0.7984 0.4246 

Total fixations 0.1019 0.00336 30 .367 1.5 × 10 −202 *** Group Var (participant) 0.0595 

Execution 

Intercept −3.550 0.1079 −32 .890 3.0 × 10 −237 *** Difficulty (hard) 0.1960 0.0777 2.523 0.0116 *Waiting condition −0.2896 0.0741 −3.909 9.3 × 10 −5 *** Difficulty × Waiting 0.1927 0.1048 1.838 0.0660 .Total fixations 0.0557 0.00184 30 .236 8.1 × 10 −201 *** Group Var (participant) 0.1234 

Table S7: logit(Repeat Ratio). GLMM estimates of fixed effects. The p-value significance code: 

∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1.44 Properties of the reconstruction of the upcoming path 

Wait Condition Phase Contrast Odds Ratio SE z-ratio p-value sig NoWait BM Easy / Hard 1.8653 0.2004 5.8024 < 10 −6 *** Wait BM Easy / Hard 1.2163 0.0708 3.3639 7.7 × 10 −4 *** NoWait Pause Easy / Hard 1.9792 0.1911 7.0724 < 10 −6 *** Wait Pause Easy / Hard 1.6780 0.1848 4.6994 2.6 × 10 −6 *** NoWait Exec Easy / Hard 2.6023 0.2044 12.1762 < 10 −6 *** Wait Exec Easy / Hard 2.1166 0.1969 8.0619 < 10 −6 *** Table S8: Difficulty contrasts (Easy vs Hard) within each phase and waiting condition for the fraction of sequences selected to be part of the best combination. Acronyms: BM = Before Movement; Exec = Execution. The p-value significance (sig) code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3,

10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1.Wait Condition Phase Contrast Odds Ratio SE z-ratio p-value sig NoWait BM Easy / Hard 1.8365 0.0958 11.6566 < 10 −6 *** Wait BM Easy / Hard 1.3162 0.0326 11.0898 < 10 −6 *** NoWait Pause Easy / Hard 1.9811 0.0993 13.6356 < 10 −6 *** Wait Pause Easy / Hard 1.6366 0.0946 8.5238 < 10 −6 *** NoWait Exec Easy / Hard 2.8982 0.1102 27.9890 < 10 −6 *** Wait Exec Easy / Hard 2.3163 0.1079 18.0251 < 10 −6 *** Table S9: Difficulty contrasts (Easy vs Hard) within each phase and waiting condition for the fraction of fixations selected to be part of the best combination. Wait Condition Phase Contrast Odds Ratio SE z-ratio p-value sig NoWait BM Easy / Hard 0.8835 0.0331 -3.3055 9.5 × 10 −4 *** Wait BM Easy / Hard 0.8805 0.0209 -5.3519 < 10 −6 *** NoWait Pause Easy / Hard 0.9816 0.0550 -0.3311 7.4 × 10 −1

Wait Pause Easy / Hard 0.9925 0.0589 -0.1261 9.0 × 10 −1

NoWait Exec Easy / Hard 1.8054 0.0941 11.3328 < 10 −6 *** Wait Exec Easy / Hard 1.5683 0.0843 8.3670 < 10 −6 *** Table S10: Difficulty contrasts (Easy vs Hard) within each phase and waiting condition for fraction of fixations directed towards nodes selected to be part of the best combination. 45 Wait Condition Phase Contrast Odds Ratio SE z-ratio p-value sig NoWait BM Easy / Hard 1.1211 0.1247 1.0275 3.0 × 10 −1

Wait BM Easy / Hard 1.4601 0.1248 4.4288 < 10 −3 *** NoWait Pause Easy / Hard 0.8858 0.0966 -1.1119 2.7 × 10 −1

Wait Pause Easy / Hard 0.8442 0.1116 -1.2815 2.0 × 10 −1

NoWait Exec Easy / Hard 1.9870 0.3021 4.5162 < 10 −3 *** Wait Exec Easy / Hard 2.0418 0.3289 4.4309 < 10 −3 *** Table S11: Difficulty contrasts (Easy vs Hard) for forward fraction within each phase and waiting condition. 46 Direct and indirect effects of task difficulty on path reconstruction 

> 47

Phase DV Path Coef SE z p 95% Boot CI Prop. Med. Before mov. Coverage c (total) 0.152 0.043 3.54 <.001*** 

a (IV →M) 2.608 0.826 3.16 0.002** 

b (M →DV) 0.037 0.001 29.17 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) 0.055 0.031 1.80 0.072 . 

a × b (indirect) 0.098 0.031 3.14 0.002** [0.026, 0.169] 0.64 Coherence c (total) 0.103 0.055 1.87 0.062 . 

a (IV →M) 2.586 0.787 3.28 0.001** 

b (M →DV) -0.015 0.002 -6.53 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) 0.143 0.054 2.66 0.008** 

a × b (indirect) -0.040 0.014 -2.93 0.003** [-0.082, -0.009] -0.39 Execution Coverage c (total) 0.103 0.028 3.71 <.001*** 

a (IV →M) 0.845 0.489 1.73 0.084 . 

b (M →DV) 0.031 0.002 18.14 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) 0.077 0.024 3.26 0.001** 

a × b (indirect) 0.026 0.015 1.72 0.085 . [-0.006, 0.058] 0.25 Coherence c (total) 0.099 0.063 1.57 0.115 

a (IV →M) 0.845 0.489 1.73 0.084 . 

b (M →DV) -0.032 0.004 -7.53 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) 0.126 0.061 2.06 0.039* 

a × b (indirect) -0.027 0.016 -1.69 0.092 . [-0.061, 0.007] -0.27 Pauses Coverage c (total) 0.484 0.125 3.87 <.001*** 

a (IV →M) 3.415 0.843 4.05 <.001*** 

b (M →DV) 0.092 0.005 18.52 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) 0.170 0.097 1.75 0.080 . 

a × b (indirect) 0.315 0.080 3.96 <.001*** [0.152, 0.489] 0.65 Coherence c (total) 0.675 0.190 3.55 <.001*** 

a (IV →M) 3.377 0.935 3.61 <.001*** 

b (M →DV) -0.027 0.010 -2.65 0.008** 

c′ (direct) 0.765 0.191 3.99 <.001*** 

a × b (indirect) -0.091 0.042 -2.14 0.032* [-0.201, -0.024] -0.13 

Table S12: Mediation analysis (Waiting condition): Sequential mixed-model mediation analysis. The structure of the mediation analysis is Independent Variable (IV) → Mediator (M) →

Dependent Variable (DV). IV is always the Difficulty; M is always the total number of fixations (for that phase); DV can be either coverage or coherence. All DVs are logit-transformed, as are bound to be in the [0,1] interval. Random intercepts per participant are used in all paths LMM. 

c = total effect of difficulty; a = effect of difficulty on mediator (total fixations); b = effect of mediator on DV controlling for difficulty; c′ = direct effect of difficulty controlling for mediator; 

a × b = indirect (mediated) effect. Sobel test used for indirect-effect z and p. Bootstrap 95% CI from participant-level resampling. Med. = proportion of total effect mediated ( a × b/c ). The p-value significance (sig) code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 , 0.05 < . < 0.1.48 Phase DV Path Coef SE z p 95% Boot CI Prop. Med. Before mov. Coverage c (total) 0.315 0.073 4.30 <.001*** 

a (IV →M) 3.739 0.838 4.46 <.001*** 

b (M →DV) 0.063 0.002 27.43 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) 0.086 0.054 1.59 0.112 

a × b (indirect) 0.235 0.053 4.41 <.001*** [0.137, 0.329] 0.75 Coherence c (total) -0.061 0.143 -0.42 0.671 

a (IV →M) 2.959 1.033 2.86 0.004** 

b (M →DV) -0.008 0.005 -1.51 0.130 

c′ (direct) -0.034 0.144 -0.24 0.812 

a × b (indirect) -0.025 0.018 -1.34 0.181 [-0.073, 0.001] 0.40 Execution Coverage c (total) 0.116 0.030 3.91 <.001*** 

a (IV →M) 0.208 0.531 0.39 0.696 

b (M →DV) 0.029 0.002 16.87 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) 0.110 0.026 4.27 <.001*** 

a × b (indirect) 0.006 0.015 0.39 0.696 [-0.018, 0.034] 0.05 Coherence c (total) 0.190 0.053 3.55 <.001*** 

a (IV →M) 0.208 0.531 0.39 0.696 

b (M →DV) -0.025 0.003 -7.36 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) 0.195 0.052 3.77 <.001*** 

a × b (indirect) -0.005 0.013 -0.39 0.696 [-0.029, 0.016] -0.03 Pauses Coverage c (total) 0.186 0.088 2.11 0.035* 

a (IV →M) 2.873 0.860 3.34 <.001*** 

b (M →DV) 0.065 0.003 21.19 <.001*** 

c′ (direct) -0.001 0.068 -0.01 0.994 

a × b (indirect) 0.187 0.057 3.30 <.001*** [0.047, 0.318] 1.00 Coherence c (total) -0.057 0.154 -0.37 0.712 

a (IV →M) 3.676 1.013 3.63 <.001*** 

b (M →DV) -0.017 0.007 -2.52 0.012* 

c′ (direct) -0.001 0.154 -0.01 0.993 

a × b (indirect) -0.061 0.030 -2.07 0.038* [-0.130, -0.015] 1.08 

Table S13: Mediation analysis (No Waiting condition): Sequential mixed-model mediation analysis. The structure of the mediation analysis is Independent Variable (IV) → Mediator (M) → Dependent Variable (DV). IV is always the Difficulty; M is always the total number of fixations (for that phase); DV can be either coverage or coherence. All DVs are logit-transformed, as are bound to be in the [0,1] interval. Random intercepts per participant are used in all paths LMM. c = total effect of difficulty; a = effect of difficulty on mediator (total fixations); b =effect of mediator on DV controlling for difficulty; c′ = direct effect of difficulty controlling for mediator; a × b = indirect (mediated) effect. Sobel test used for indirect-effect z and p.Bootstrap 95% CI from participant-level resampling. Med. = proportion of total effect mediated (a × b/c ). The p-value significance (sig) code: ∗ ∗ ∗ < 10 −3, 10 −3 < ∗∗ < 10 −2, 10 −2 < ∗ < 0.05 ,

0.05 < . < 0.1.49