Title: Switched Reading: Toward Seamless Visual-Auditory Switching When Reading Text in Augmented/Mixed Reality

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06985v1

Published Time: Mon, 10 Aug 2026 00:40:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

# Switched Reading: Toward Seamless Visual-Auditory Switching When Reading Text in Augmented/Mixed Reality 

Kazuyuki Fujita * Yuto Matsui Ikuru Sato Guanghan Zhao † Yoshifumi Kitamura ‡

Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus... 

Gaze-based text highlight 

> Donec quam felis, ultricies nec, pellentesque eu, pretium quis, sem. Nulla consequat...

(a) Visual (b) Visual + Auditory (c) Auditory 

Figure 1: Switched Reading allows the user to continue reading text while switching between visual and auditory modalities according to the user’s context changes (e.g., from sitting in a cafe (a) to walking around town (b-c)). The interface provides a visual display (a) and voice reading (c) of text, as well as an intermediate state (b) that highlights the currently read content, based on gaze, in the transition between the two modalities. 

ABSTRACT 

Augmented/mixed reality (AR/MR) wearable glasses now permit information interaction anywhere, but visual displays can be in-appropriate when real-world awareness is essential. We propose 

Switched Reading , a novel interaction framework for reading text in AR/MR that supports switching between visual and auditory modalities as needed. Specifically, we explore two key interac-tion techniques within this framework: (1) gaze-based voice play-back and (2) a correspondence-aware transition effect. We imple-mented them on an MR headset through a parameter-tuning user test. Next, we conducted a user study (N=16) to investigate the im-pact of the two techniques on reading performance and overall user experience with simulated modality switching in virtual reality. The results show that the condition combining both techniques was the most preferred among four conditions. Moreover, we found that the gaze-based voice playback reduced gaze offsets when switching modalities and improved reading speed over the baseline condition using scroll position. Finally, we implemented a Switched Reading application for reading while walking and collected user feedback, yielding further design implications for practical use. 

Index Terms: Multi-modal interaction, eye tracking, transition effect. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Recently, the proliferation of head-worn displays (HWDs) has en-abled users to interact with computers regardless of location or con-text. Commercially available augmented/mixed reality (AR/MR) HWDs allow users to display virtual content at arbitrary posi-tions in mid-air without physical constraints. This capability has been explored for various scenarios where traditional displays 

> *

e-mail: k-fujita@riec.tohoku.ac.jp 

> †

e-mail: zhao.guanghan.b6@tohoku.ac.jp 

> ‡

e-mail: kitamura@riec.tohoku.ac.jp 

are inconvenient to use, such as during walking or commuting [38, 48, 8, 32, 26, 16, 49, 20], cycling [47, 46, 5, 2, 30], and ex-ercising (e.g., dancing [50] or yoga [17]). However, interacting with virtual content in AR/MR environ-ments diverts attention away from the real world. Specifically, vir-tual content displayed in mid-air may occlude important informa-tion in the real-world environment or reduce the user’s situational awareness, leading to communication breakdowns [19, 37] or phys-ical risks (e.g., collisions with people or objects while walking) [15]. Prior research has attempted to address these issues through improvements in content layout [38, 48, 3, 33, 32], presentation style [38, 20, 5], text and background colors [6, 9], coordinate sys-tems [8], font types [29], and interaction timing [26]. Nevertheless, all of these approaches require users to visually focus on the con-tent, which does not fundamentally resolve the above issues. One task where this is particularly problematic is reading for compre-hension, where users must maintain visual attention on the content for extended periods, exacerbating the lack of situational awareness in the real world. To address this issue, we focus on auditory presentation as an alternative modality and explore a novel way of comprehending text by seamlessly switching between visual and auditory modalities, which we call Switched Reading . While the auditory modality (i.e., listening to text) is slower than the visual modality (i.e., reading text) in terms of cognitive processing speed, it is considered more effective in reducing cognitive load in scenarios requiring attention to the external environment, such as walking or driving [40, 35]. Accordingly, we believe that Switched Reading has the potential to support users in continuing to read in AR/MR while maintaining their attention, even under changing external contexts. Although a few prior studies have explored similar ideas that involve modality switching while reading (e.g., for smartphones [45]), there has been little investigation into detailed user interface design to minimize potential context loss during modality switching. However, many recent HWDs have been equipped with eye trackers, which could be used to achieve smarter switched reading experiences. Therefore, in this study, we explore the detailed interface design of a system that manages the visual-auditory transition to provide 

seamless Switched Reading in AR/MR (Figure 1). Here, “seam-1arXiv:2608.06985v1 [cs.HC] 7 Aug 2026 Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

less” refers to the ability to maintain the context of the text before and after modality switching while minimizing wasteful repetition. To achieve this, we introduce two key interaction techniques: (1) gaze-based voice playback, where voice reading begins near the reading position estimated from the user’s gaze (Figure 1a →b), and (2) a correspondence-aware transition effect, where the inter-face highlights the currently read content during the visual-auditory modality switching (Figure 1a →b→c and c →b→a). These tech-niques are expected to reduce the cognitive load required for users to locate their reading position, thus providing benefits in scenarios where visual information presentation is intermittently unavailable or inappropriate (e.g., walking, cycling, exercising, or closing one’s eyes). We developed a prototype of the proposed interface using Meta Quest Pro, an HWD equipped with an eye tracker. Detailed param-eters of its behavior were determined through a preliminary user study (N=8). Using this prototype, we conducted a larger user study (N=16) to investigate the impact of our key techniques— (1) gaze-based playback and (2) the correspondence-aware tran-sition effect—on reading performance and user experience during Switched Reading. The results show that gaze-based switching re-duced the number of gaze shifts required to locate the reading po-sition and improved reading speed; furthermore, an interface com-bining both techniques was found to be the type most preferred by users. Finally, we implemented a Switched Reading application for reading while walking and collected user feedback. Based on these findings, we derived design guidelines for interfaces that support a better Switched Reading experience. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: • Formulation of Switched Reading as an interaction design space for maintaining textual context across visual and au-ditory presentation in AR/MR, together with a discussion of its possible interaction scenarios, • Design exploration of a Switched Reading interface featuring gaze-based playback and a transition effect that enables seam-less modality transitions, along with its prototype running on an MR headset, • A controlled user study (N=16) in VR revealing that our in-terface’s gaze-based voice playback feature contributed to re-duced gaze shifts during modality switching and increased reading speed, and • An application study (N=12) of reading while walking, yield-ing design implications for practical use. 

2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 Interacting with Floating Content in AR/MR 

In AR/MR, users can access virtual content in mid-air while main-taining awareness of their real-world surroundings [18, 38, 11]. Thus, an increasing number of research works have examined ar-ranging virtual content in mobile or multitasking contexts [10, 28, 33, 38, 26]. For instance, Lu et al. [26] proposed Glanceable AR ,an interaction paradigm in which virtual content is arranged at the edge of the user’s field of view to be accessed by glancing at it. Their follow-up studies [25, 27] have demonstrated its efficacy in daily life scenarios. However, this approach assumes content that can be grasped instantly (e.g., icons or widgets), and thus it is not well-suited to reading long-form text, the focus of this study. Furthermore, there is a growing body of research on mobile read-ing tasks during multitasking (primarily walking) [38, 48, 8, 32], similar to our study. For example, Rzayev et al. [38] investigated display positions and methods for text, revealing that placing text in the upper-right field of view increased cognitive load and reduced comprehension. Zhou et al. [48] showed that increasing line spac-ing improved both reading and walking speed, facilitating smoother task switching between reading and navigation. However, in such multitasking environments, users must divide their visual attention between the virtual content and the real world, potentially reducing task performance [34]. Therefore, our study focuses on the audi-tory modality as an alternative for information acquisition, aiming to improve the efficiency of content consumption in AR/MR en-vironments by adaptively switching between visual and auditory modalities depending on the user’s context. 

2.2 Visual/Auditory Reading 

While both visual and auditory modalities can be used to process text, they differ in their processing characteristics and cognitive efficiency. A representative meta-analysis by Virginia et al. [4] compared comprehension between visual and auditory modalities across 46 studies. They found that visual reading is more effective when deep understanding is required or when users can control the pace of reading. Moreover, visual modalities provide advantages such as better overview, easy backtracking, and integration with structural elements like figures and tables. These attributes explain why most text-based information acquisition in daily life is visually oriented. However, auditory presentation is more appropriate in some sit-uations. Vadas et al. [40] compared smartphone-based visual dis-plays and text-to-speech displays for static and walking conditions. They found auditory presentation to be effective for reading while walking, since it reduces cognitive load related to monitoring the external environment. Similar findings have been reported for driv-ing scenarios [35]. This aligns with the common practice of lis-tening to the radio while driving, whereas the visual use of smart-phones in such contexts is discouraged for safety. In addition, the simultaneous use of visual and auditory modal-ities has been explored. Studies have reported that dual-modality presentation can enhance text comprehension compared to using a single modality [39, 24]. However, some users find the auditory reading pace limiting or distracting when accompanied by visual content [39]. Consequently, each modality has its own advantages and limitations, suggesting that adaptive switching depending on the context would be ideal. 

2.3 Visual-Auditory Modality Switching 

With the widespread adoption of audiobooks and podcasts, auditory presentation has become one of the major modalities for acquiring textual information. While much of the research on auditory text presentation has focused on accessibility [44, 12, 36], relatively few studies have investigated the use of both visual and auditory modal-ities in content acquisition. One notable example is the study of Hsieh et al. [14], which pro-posed an interaction technique that allows users to switch modali-ties between visual (displaying text on a tablet) and auditory (read-ing by voice) presentation depending on the situation during a city navigation task. However, their system does not support seamless switching of modalities in the course of content acquisition—an important distinction from our study. Although not designed for HWDs, Yu [45] proposed a smart-phone interface that automatically switches between visual and au-ditory modalities depending on whether the user is walking or sta-tionary. This system was shown to be more effective than using a single modality. However, it initiates voice playback from the beginning of the currently displayed screen, regardless of the user’s reading position in the text, which may result in a gap between what the user last saw and what they hear. Therefore, it is not possible to guarantee context continuity during switching. In contrast, our study explores a user interface that explicitly supports the mainte-nance of contextual continuity during modality switching. 2Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. (a) Manual control (e.g., press a button on HWD) (b) User activity (e.g., stationary/walking) (c) Eye state (e.g., open/close) (d) Surrounding objects (e.g., presence of possible interaction objects) 

> Tap!
> Tap!
> Visual Auditory

Figure 2: Interaction scenarios of Switched Reading. 

3 SWITCHED READING 

As a practical step toward achieving such an interface, we pro-pose Switched Reading , a novel interaction framework for reading text in AR/MR that supports switching between visual and audi-tory modalities as needed. To support users in maintaining their reading context even during modality switching, we introduce and explore two key interaction techniques within this framework: (1) gaze-based voice playback and (2) a correspondence-aware transi-tion effect. The remainder of this section describes the detailed de-sign of these techniques and the implementation of our prototype, as well as possible interaction scenarios using our framework. 

3.1 Key Interaction Techniques 

Toward seamless switching between visual and auditory modalities while maintaining textual context, we introduce two key techniques as follows. 

(1) Gaze-based voice playback . When switching from visual to auditory presentation, there is inevitably a gap between the user’s current visual reading position in the text and the audio playback’s starting point, which should be minimized. To deal with this, our interface uses eye gaze: The interface estimates the user’s real-time reading position based on gaze direction and starts the audio play-back accordingly. 

(2) Correspondence-aware transition effect . To support the user’s awareness of the correspondence between the modalities’ contents during visual-auditory switching, our interface employs a visual-auditory transition effect. Using this effect, the system visu-ally highlights the audibly read part of the text for a certain amount of time as the modality is switched. This helps users find where to start reading in the other modality, thus maintaining contextual continuity between modalities. 

3.2 Possible Interaction Scenarios 

Switched Reading can be used in various scenarios where visual presentation of text information is temporarily unavailable or inap-propriate. While this study does not address when or how to switch modalities, here we introduce several typical examples of interac-tion scenarios that take these practical considerations into account. The most naive approach involves manual switching by the user (Figure 2a). The system can provide a simple toggle command, adopting various input methods such as the HWD’s built-in inter-face controls, freehand gestures, or voice input. More intelligent switching interactions can be designed by map-ping modality changes to specific user behaviors or environmen-tal contexts. For instance, as explored in the previous study using smartphones [45], switching based on user activity, i.e., walking (auditory) versus stationary (visual) states, can support diverse sce-narios and help prevent distracted walking (Figure 2b). In indoor settings like offices or libraries, modality switching based on seated (visual) versus standing (auditory) postures could also be beneficial. Another strategy is to trigger switching by eye state, i.e., open (vi-sual) versus closed (auditory) (Figure 2c). This would allow users to continue reading the text while intermittently closing their eyes, which may be beneficial in mitigating eye strain. Furthermore, modality switching based on the environmental context is another promising strategy. For example, previous stud-ies have often considered the placement of AR UIs based on the estimation of real-world surroundings and the possibility of user interaction with them [23, 22]. Following this approach, the text presentation modality could adaptively switch depending on the presence of objects or people in the environment that are likely to interact with the user (Figure 2d). This would help reduce the user’s cognitive load and prioritize real-world awareness. 

3.3 Implementation 

We implemented our prototype along with the two key interaction techniques described above. We used Meta Quest Pro 1, an HWD equipped with an eye tracker (per-eye resolution: 1832 x 1920 pix-els, horizontal FOV: 106°, vertical FOV: 96°). The prototype was developed with a PC (Intel ® Core™ i9-9900K CPU @ 3.60 GHz, 32 GB RAM, GeForce RTX 4070Ti 16 GB) using Unity version 2022.3.3f1 and Oculus Integration, but it also works with the HWD alone without being tethered to the PC. For the speech synthesis engine, we used Microsoft Azure AI Speech 2.The parameters of the text display interface (as shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6b), such as the size and color of the virtual window, text color, and number of visible lines, were designed with refer-ence to previous research and guidelines [7, 6, 42, 31], and they were optimized for viewing in Japanese. Specifically, the virtual window was placed 2.0 meters in front of the user, with its center positioned 5° below eye level. The window measured 1.0 m by 1.0 m, with 92% opacity. Approximately nine lines of text were dis-played within the window, each containing approximately 15 char-acters. The line spacing was set to 1.2 to balance the amount of visible text and the accuracy of gaze-based estimation of reading position. Text scrolling was controlled using the thumbstick on the Meta Quest Pro controller. In the following, we describe the im-plementation of the two key interaction techniques: (1) gaze-based 

> 1

https://www.meta.com/quest/quest-pro/ 

> 2

https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/ai-services/ai-speech 

3Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

Figure 3: Flow of reading position estimation. Estimates reading position from gaze Estimates reading position from gaze 

> Scrolls text along with audio in background Scrolls text along with audio in background

(a) Transition from visual to auditory (b) Transition from auditory to visual 

## (( ))Estimated text in reading Estimated text in reading 

① Visual ② Visual+Auditory ③ Auditory ① Auditory ② Visual+Auditory ③ Visual 

> Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus... Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus... Donec quam felis, ultricies nec, pellentesque eu, pretium quis, sem. Nulla consequat... ...commondo ligula eget dolor. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient

Figure 4: System overview of proposed prototype. voice playback and (2) correspondence-aware transition effect. 

3.3.1 Gaze-based Voice Playback 

To estimate the user’s reading position on the displayed text, we adopted a gaze-based approach inspired by previous research [41]. Our system uses the Meta Quest Pro’s built-in eye tracker in this estimation process, which is illustrated in Figure 3. First, for each character, the system pre-generates index data consisting of the sen-tence ID (sentence index in overall text) and phrase ID (delimiter index within each sentence separated by the reading point). Dur-ing runtime, the system retrieves the user’s gaze direction as a 3D vector in each frame. Since raw gaze data tend to be noisy, we applied a saccade-detection and smoothing algorithm from a pre-vious work [21] to filter the data. If the filtered gaze vector inter-sects with the text window, the character closest to the intersection point is identified through brute-force matching. When the modal-ity shifts from visual to auditory, the voice playback starts based on the estimated reading position (more detailed parameter tuning is described in Section 3.4). 

3.3.2 Correspondence-aware Transition Effect 

To support the user’s contextual continuity in reading during modal-ity switching, our interface introduces a transitional phase in which the visual and auditory modalities are active simultaneously (Fig-ure 4). In the following, we describe the transition behaviors in detail. 

Visual → Auditory When switching from visual to auditory pre-sentation, the interface transitions from fully opaque text display (Figure 4a 1⃝) to semi-transparent text with voice playback (Fig-ure 4a 2⃝), thus providing a cue indicating that the modality is being changed. The voice playback starts based on the estimated read-ing position. During this transition, to support visual tracking, the currently spoken text (i.e., phrase divided by punctuation) is high-lighted in yellow (Figure 4a 2⃝). A few seconds after the transition is initiated, the text display becomes fully transparent, and then only the audio modality continues (Figure 4 3⃝). 

Auditory → Visual While the audio is playing (Figure 4b 1⃝), the interface automatically sets the scroll position of the transparent text so that the spoken content stays at the top of a text window, although this window remains hidden from the user at this time. When the modality switch is triggered, the interface transitions to a semi-transparent display where the currently spoken sentence is highlighted and positioned at the top of the window (Figure 4b 2⃝). After a few seconds, the audio playback discontinues and the text becomes fully opaque to allow the user to continue visual reading (Figure 4b 3⃝). 

3.4 Parameter-tuning Study 

3.4.1 Overview 

We conducted a preliminary user study to fine-tune the key pa-rameters of our interface. Eight students (six males, two females; mean age = 23.9 ± 3.06) from our university or graduate school volunteered to participate in this study. Here, we examined two parameters that potentially influence the seamlessness of modal-ity switching: (1) the starting point of voice playback—either at the beginning of the sentence containing the last fixated character (sentence-level ), at the beginning of the phrase divided by punctu-ation ( phrase-level ), or from the fixated character itself ( character-level )—and (2) the duration of the transition effect—1, 3, or 5 sec-onds. Participants read a certain amount of text every 30 seconds under varied presentation modalities in a VR environment. First, they ran-domly experienced three conditions differing in the starting point of the voice playback and selected their preferred condition. Next, un-der their preferred voice playback condition, they randomly experi-enced three conditions differing in the duration of the transition ef-fect and again selected their preferred condition. After completing these trials, we gathered qualitative feedback from the participants on their impressions and suggestions for potential improvement. 

3.4.2 Results and Discussion 

Starting point of voice playback : Four participants preferred the phrase-level condition, while the other four favored the character-level condition. Those who chose the phrase-level playback noted that it started at a “clean break” and thus required less rereading. However, one participant also reported frustration when content they had already read visually was repeated audibly. In contrast, 4Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. (a) Visual (b) Visual + Auditory (c) Auditory 

Figure 5: Actual views of our prototype for each phase. participants who preferred the character-level condition appreci-ated the minimal rereading required, but some found it disorienting when playback started at an unnatural point. Given that the prefer-ences were evenly split, we believe this parameter should be cus-tomizable for each user in practical use. We also speculate that the phrase-level condition may be more effective when this interface is used in more distracting situations, such as while walking. In the subsequent user study, we decided to use phrase-level playback. 

Duration of transition effect : Three participants preferred a 3-second duration, while another three preferred 5 seconds. However, multiple participants stated that the most desirable duration differed depending on the direction of the modality switch. When asked for clarification of this distinction, four participants indicated that a 3-second transition was ideal when switching from visual to auditory modalities. In contrast, three participants preferred a 1-second tran-sition from auditory to visual, while four participants expressed a desire for the system to continue voice playback until the end of the sentence. Based on this feedback, in the subsequent user study we adopted a hybrid policy rather than setting a fixed duration: 3 sec-onds of transition effect for visual-to-auditory switching but contin-uation of the effect until the end of the currently spoken sentence for auditory-to-visual switching. 

4 USER STUDY : EFFECTS OF MODALITY -S WITCHING 

TECHNIQUES ON READING EXPERIENCE 

We conducted a user study to evaluate the effectiveness of each of the two key interaction techniques in Switched Reading. We chose a fully immersive VR environment to minimize the influence of ex-ternal factors and to clarify how different modality-switching meth-ods affect the reading experience, rather than to establish their ef-fectiveness in real-world AR/MR use. Specifically, we investigated the impact of the presence/absence of the gaze-based voice play-back and the transition effect on user reading performance and user experience in a VR environment, where the text modality switches periodically. The experimental design of this study was approved by the Institute’s Ethics Review Committee. 

4.1 Participants 

Sixteen undergraduate or graduate students (10 males, 6 females; mean age = 22.3 ± 2.11) participated in the study. Participants with binocular visual acuity of 0.7 or better, including those with contact lenses, were recruited (we requested in advance that they refrain from participating in the experiment while wearing eyeglasses due to the potential for eye tracking inaccuracies). None of the partic-ipants had prior knowledge of this study. Seven participants used an HWD for the first time, and the remaining nine had used one at least twice. Eleven participants reported using audio-based media (e.g., radio, podcasts, audiobooks) at least once a month. 

4.2 Experimental Design 

The study followed a within-subjects design with two independent variables: voice playback (gaze-based voice playback ( GVP ) vs. scroll-position-based voice playback ( SVP )) and transition effect 

(with transition effect ( TE ) vs. no transition effect ( NTE )). For voice playback, we designed SVP as a baseline condition based on the previous study of mobile continuous reading [45], in which voice playback starts from the phrase shown at the top of the cur-rently displayed screen. As for the baseline of transition effect, we implemented NTE where visual and auditory presentations were presented sequentially without any temporal overlap. In the task, participants read a specific text for five minutes while the modality switched between visual and auditory every 30 sec-onds. This setup simulates scenarios where the appropriate modal-ity changes over time (e.g., walking through a city and occasionally stopping at intersections with “Walk”/“Wait” signals) while min-imizing the influence of external factors. We chose a 30-second interval to collect enough switching events without disrupting the task due to loss of textual context. Participants were instructed to read the text both for comprehension and with the goal of reading as quickly as possible within a comfortable range. The dependent variables included comprehension accuracy, reading speed (characters per minute (CPM)), number of visual rereads, visual-auditory offset, NASA-TLX [13], and System Us-ability Scale (SUS) [1]. For reading speed, we used characters per minute (CPM) rather than words per minute (WPM) because the stimuli were Japanese, where reading/listening pace is closely tied to phonological units (morae). For the number of rereads, we counted them based on participants’ gaze behavior: We determined the most frequently gazed-at line number within each time window and considered a reread to have occurred when the gaze returned by more than three lines compared with the previous window. We also implemented an auditory reread function using the controller’s thumbstick, but we did not analyze it because it was rarely used in our pilot test. Visual-auditory offset was calculated as the character difference between the last fixated character and the first character of the voice playback. We assumed that this metric indicated how much the user’s (estimated) reading position shifted when switching from vi-sual to auditory modality, thus reflecting how smoothly the user switched modalities. Subjective metrics included NASA-TLX and SUS, which were rated on a 7-point Likert scale. We also obtained qualitative com-ments on the user experience during the visual-auditory transition and overall text reading comprehension. 

4.3 Apparatus 

Figures 6a and 6b show an overview of the experimental setup and the virtual environment presented to the participants, respectively. We used the same system described in Section 3.3 with one modifi-cation: All synthesized voice was pre-generated and stored locally. In our pilot test, we found that our system took approximately 1.3 seconds to initiate speech synthesis, which could significantly af-fect the seamlessness of the modality switching experience. To in-vestigate the user experience without such implementation-related limitations, we virtually eliminated the playback delay by preload-ing audio files locally (starting in less than 10 −5 seconds). 5Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.      

> (a) Experimental setup. (b) Virtual environment presented to participants.

Figure 6: Apparatus. (a) TE conditions 

> Opacity / Volume (%) Opacity / Volume (%)

(b) NTE conditions     

> Time (s)
> ↑Until end of sentence 0100 50 30 60 27 30 57 60 0100 50
> Visual (opacity) Auditory (volume)

Figure 7: Visual-auditory differences between TE and NTE conditions. The text materials and comprehension questions were generated using GPT-4o, a large language model (LLM) by OpenAI 3. The in-put prompt specified the target character count (around 7,000 char-acters) and genre (novel, essay, or commentary on sports/arts). We then slightly edited the generated texts manually to improve read-ability. The difficulty level of all text materials used was rated as “low-intermediate ” (i.e., normal difficulty, the fourth highest of six levels) by jReadability 4, a system for assessing the difficulty of text in Japanese. Each text was accompanied by three multiple-choice comprehension questions created by the LLM, which were further refined by the authors (e.g., “ Where did Akira and his friends first go stargazing? a. Seaside, b. Mountain peak, c. Downtown, d. For-est ”). These questions were designed to assess whether participants correctly understood and remembered the content of the text. The content and difficulty level we set were confirmed to be appropriate in our informal pilot test. 

4.4 Procedure 

4.4.1 Overall Procedure 

The experiment involved four conditions combining two voice playback conditions (GVP and SVP) and two transition effect con-ditions (TE and NTE). The order of the four conditions and the four texts used in the trials was counterbalanced across participants. The entire experiment took approximately 120 minutes per participant, including short breaks between conditions. Here, we describe this procedure in detail. First, the experi-menter explained the task and obtained informed consent. The par-ticipant then put on the HWD, and inter-pupillary distance was cal-ibrated. After this preparation, the participant completed a practice trial. In this trial, participants were introduced to the interface used in the main trials, their eye tracking was calibrated using a func-tion of Quest Pro, and they were given a practice text of similar difficulty to the main tasks. They received instructions on how to operate the interface and were then asked to read the entire text. Afterward, they answered three multiple-choice questions to assess their text comprehension. They practiced using the interface until they felt comfortable with it. Following a short break, participants proceeded to the main tri-als. They completed the main reading task with each interface and then answered three multiple-choice comprehension questions. Af-ter completing the trials for each interface, participants filled out a 

> 3

https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/ 

> 4

https://jreadability.net/sys/ 

Google Form questionnaire assessing NASA-TLX and SUS. Then, we conducted a semi-structured interview to mainly explore how the conditions influenced the user experience during the visual-auditory transition as well as overall text reading comprehension. 

4.4.2 Task Procedure 

Here, we explain the procedure used for the reading task. First, participants calibrated the text display location after assuming a comfortable reading posture and pressing a button on the controller. During the reading task, the text transitioned every 30 seconds be-tween visual and auditory modalities. At the start of each task, the text was always initially visible. In the TE conditions, the text win-dow changed its opacity three seconds before switching the modal-ity. The task ended when the participant either finished reading the entire text and pressed a button on the controller or when the final sentence of the audio was completed. Although a five-minute time limit was set for the task, all participants were able to complete it within that time. Task duration, used to calculate reading speed, was measured from the time the initial text was displayed to when the task was completed. 

4.5 Results 

All participants successfully completed all trials without problems. Since Shapiro-Wilk tests showed most data distributions did not satisfy normality, we used non-parametric statistical methods for analysis. Note that GVP-TE is the condition corresponding to our proposed interaction technique (i.e., the combination of the two in-teraction techniques within the Switched Reading framework). 

4.5.1 Objective Measures 

Reading Speed (CPM) . Figure 8 shows CPM across conditions. A two-way Aligned-Rank Transform (ART) ANOVA [43] showed showed no significant interaction between voice playback and tran-sition effect ( F(1, 15 ) = 0.10 , p = 0.752 , η2 

> p

= 0.007). Regard-ing the main effect, we found a significant main effect of voice playback ( F(1, 15 ) = 21 .21 , p < . 001 , η2 

> p

= .586). The Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed that GVP yielded significantly higher CPM than did SVP ( r = −0.789, W = 7.0, p = 0.002). In contrast, there was no significant main effect of transition effect ( F(1, 15 ) = 

1.94 , p = 0.184 , η2 

> p

= 0.115). 

Comprehension Accuracy . Figure 9 displays comprehension ac-curacy across conditions. ART ANOVA showed no significant in-teraction (interaction: F(1, 15 ) = 0.24 , p = 0.628 , η2 

> p

= .016) or 6Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

Figure 8: Reading speed (CPM) Figure 9: Comprehension accuracy Figure 10: Number of rereads (Visual) 

Figure 11: Visual-auditory offset Figure 12: NASA-TLX score Figure 13: SUS score main effect (voice playback: F(1, 15 ) = 0.25 , p = 0.625 , η2 

> p

=

0.016; transition effect: F(1, 15 ) = 1.67 , p = 0.216 , η2 

> p

= 0.100). 

Number of Rereads . Figure 10 shows the number of visual rereads. ART ANOVA indicated no significant interaction (interac-tion: F(1, 15 ) = 2.04 , p = 0.174 , η2 

> p

= 0.120) or main effect (voice playback: F(1, 15 ) = 0.53 , p = 0.479 , η2 

> p

= 0.034; transition effect: 

F(1, 15 ) = 1.64 , p = 0.220 , η2 

> p

= 0.099). 

Visual-Auditory Offset . Figure 11 shows the visual-auditory off-set by number of characters. ART ANOVA showed no signifi-cant interaction effect ( F(1, 15 ) = 0.20 , p = 0.659 , η2 

> p

= 0.013). However, a significant main effect of voice playback was found (F(1, 15 ) = 65 .08 , p < 0.001 , η2 

> p

= 0.813). The Wilcoxon signed-rank test revealed that the offset was significantly smaller with GVP than with SVP ( r = 0.879, W = 136 .0, p < 0.001). No significant main effect was found for transition effect ( F(1, 15 ) = 0.30 , p =

0.590 , η2 

> p

= 0.020). 

4.5.2 Subjective Measures 

NASA-TLX . Figure 12 shows average NASA-TLX scores across the six subscales for each condition. Out of the four conditions, our proposed combination (i.e., GVP-TE) yielded the lowest aver-age score ( M = 49 .85 , SD = 16 .11). However, ART ANOVA re-vealed no significant interaction (interaction: F(1, 15 ) = 3.01 , p =

0.103 , η2 

> p

= 0.167) or main effect (voice playback: F(1, 15 ) = 

2.46 , p = 0.138 , η2 

> p

= 0.141; transition effect: F(1, 15 ) = 0.02 , p =

0.902 , η2 

> p

= 0.001). 

SUS . Figure 13 gives the SUS scores. ART ANOVA showed no significant interaction ( F(1, 15 ) = 0.09 , p = 0.775 , η2 

> p

= 0.006) or main effect (voice playback: F(1, 15 ) = 0.14 , p = 0.711 , η2 

> p

=

0.009; transition effect: F(1, 15 ) = 0.27 , p = 0.608 , η2 

> p

= 0.018). 

Preferences and Comments . Figure 14 illustrates the participants’ preferences for the four conditions in order of favorability. Among the 16 participants, 10 selected GVP-TE as their most preferred 

Figure 14: Participant preferences for the four conditions. condition, 4 chose GVP-NTE, 1 selected SVP-TE, and 1 chose SVP-NTE. The reasons cited for preferring GVP-TE included the ability to seamlessly switch between visual and auditory modalities (P2, P4, P6, P7, P9, P14, P16), ease of understanding the text (P7, P13, P16), enhanced focus during reading (P5, P6), and the ability to maintain an awareness of their reading position (P13, P14). When asked about the audio playback’s starting position (GVP vs. SVP), participants overwhelmingly expressed positive opinions about GVP. This condition was praised for achieving faster reading (P1, P3, P12), better comprehension of the text (P1, P5), a more nat-ural experience of reading/hearing text (P12), and the participant’s ability to focus more on reading (P6). In contrast, the SVP condition received predominantly negative feedback. Participants noted that they had to constantly monitor the scroll position (P5, P6, P14, P15) and sometimes lost track of their reading position (P2). Additionally, several participants (P7, P9, P10, P13) mentioned that during the visual-to-auditory transi-tion, voice playback often started from a section they had already read, which they found repetitive and annoying. On the other hand, some participants stated the opposite: While the same section was 7Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

repeated, it caused minimal confusion (P8), or it was found prefer-able (P11) or even helpful for better comprehension (P3, P11, P16). Regarding the transition effect (TE vs. NTE), most participants expressed a more favorable impression of the TE condition. Inter-estingly, many participants (P1, P2, P4, P5, P6, P13, P15, P16) mentioned that they could better comprehend the text under TE compared to NTE. Other positive feedback included observations that the text was easier to read (P5, P7, P13, P14), the transitions were smoother (P15, P16), it allowed them to mentally prepare for the switch (P11), they did not lose track of their reading position (P14), and they could focus better on reading (P6). In contrast, some participants mentioned a gap between their reading speed and the voice playback speed, which they found bothersome (P1, P3), and that their reading pace slowed down (P1). Additionally, one participant (P10) preferred the NTE condition, citing its simplicity and fewer changes in the presentation format. 

4.6 Discussion 

4.6.1 Voice Playback 

One of the most notable findings was that the visual-auditory off-set was significantly smaller in the GVP conditions than in the SVP conditions . While this result may seem intuitive, it is worth highlighting that the voice playback position in SVP was more than 50 characters away from the gaze position during modality switches, whereas in GVP, the offset was reduced to approximately 10 characters. Playback method also had large effects on reading speed ( η2 

> p

= .586, |r| = .789), although their magnitude may not generalize to naturalistic AR/MR settings. Interview feedback also suggests that GVP facilitated faster reading. Moreover, while we hypothesized that GVP would result in fewer rereads, no signifi-cant difference was observed between conditions. This is perhaps because the participants were focused enough on the reading task that there was little rereading, regardless of the condition. Results may differ in more complex tasks, such as walking while avoiding obstacles, where reading performance is known to decline signifi-cantly [18]. In contrast, SVP was less preferred by participants. From the in-terviews, we speculated that the primary reason was the perception of participants that they were compelled to adapt their reading be-havior to the system. Specifically, they felt they had to constantly monitor the scroll position in anticipation of modality switches. Despite these differences, SVP did not differ significantly from GVP in terms of comprehension accuracy. This might be because SVP was designed to always start voice playback from the begin-ning of the visible text window, resulting in a backward offset (i.e., voice playback started from a section the user had already read). While some participants found this repetitive and annoying—and it actually led to a decrease in reading speed—others noted that it helped reinforce their understanding. In our pilot test, we also con-sidered another design in which audio playback starts from the mid-dle of the text window in the SVP condition. However, this design should be avoided because it risks starting playback from sections the user had not yet read. 

4.6.2 Transition Effect 

Although several participants perceived TE conditions as helpful for understanding the text, comprehension accuracy did not differ significantly between TE and NTE. We therefore interpret these comments as perceived support for maintaining textual context, rather than as evidence of improved comprehension performance. Furthermore, the TE conditions did not significantly affect read-ing speed. We interpret this as the transition effect functioning as a “safety net” to prevent users from losing their reading position, thus providing a greater sense of control without directly improv-ing performance. More specifically, the NTE conditions may not have caused substantial problems in completing the tasks because the reading position was accurately estimated (in GVP conditions) or the voice playback position was always fixed (in SVP condi-tions). Again, participants in this study were able to focus on the reading task, but the transition effect may be more useful in more distracting situations that also require attention to the real world. Furthermore, the lack of significant advantages of the TE condi-tions in subjective metrics, such as NASA-TLX and SUS, might be attributed to certain design shortcomings. First, participants were bothered by the mismatch between their visual reading speed and the voice playback speed. Addressing this may require features that allow users to customize the playback speed or dynamically adjust it based on gaze position. Second, some participants (P5, P9) felt that the 3-second duration of the transition effect was too short. While this duration was determined based on our preliminary test, it may have imposed time pressure on users to achieve the transition within a limited time frame. To address this, the transition duration and profile could be customized or adapted to the switching direc-tion, reading speed, and context, while persisting until the user has successfully tracked the audio playback position with their gaze. 

5 APPLICATION STUDY 

5.1 Overview 

To derive more practical design guidelines of Switched Reading, we built an application designed for reading while walking and inves-tigated its user experience by obtaining objective/subjective data. Twelve volunteers (10 males, 2 females, and no others) from a lo-cal university participated in the study. Their mean age was 22.67 years ( SD = 1.18). We used equipment similar to that in the previ-ous user study described in Section 4. This application study was covered by the same institutional ethics approval as the previous user study. The application implemented two switching methods corre-sponding to those shown in Figure 2 a and b: Manual Switch and 

Activity-based Switch . For the Manual Switch, we simply used but-ton presses on the Meta Quest Pro controller. The Activity-based Switch automatically switched between visual and auditory modal-ities based on the user’s stationary or walking state. To detect these states, we calculated the walking speed by acquiring the moving av-erage of the HMD’s positional coordinates at approximately 70 Hz. The state transitions between stationary and walking were triggered when the walking speed remained below or above a predetermined threshold for a certain duration. The task was designed as a dual-task scenario that combined walking and text reading, following previous studies using simi-lar protocols [18, 26, 38]. For the walking task, participants walked back and forth along a 1.5 m wide and 25 m long empty corridor. Additionally, as shown in Figure 15, two virtual spheres simulat-ing traffic signals were displayed at fixed positions in their visual field, switching between red and blue colors at 30-second intervals with random fluctuations of a few seconds. Participants were in-structed to walk at a safe, comfortable pace when the signal was blue and to remain stationary when it was red. For the reading task, participants were instructed to read the text (as in the previous user study) as much as possible while maintaining comprehension throughout the trial. For the Manual Switch, participants were in-structed that they could switch modalities at any time during the trial. After experiencing each of the two modality-switching meth-ods, participants completed the SUS questionnaire and participated in a semi-structured interview. The presentation order of the two methods was counterbalanced across participants. Metrics applied can be found in Table 1. 

5.2 Results and Discussion 

Table 1 presents the results of SUS scores and other objective met-rics, as well as the results of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests comparing the two modality-switching methods. 8Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

Table 1: Results of application study with statistic values of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests. Metric Manual Switch Activity-based Switch r p

SUS score 79.4 ( SD = 9.54) 66.0 ( SD = 22 .4) 0.477 0.067 Number of modality switches 4.75 ( SD = 3.93) 10.75 ( SD = 0.750) 0.069 0.004** Audio/Visual duration used 24.4 %/75.6 % 50.3 %/49.7 % - -Reading speed (CPM) 490 ( SD = 222) 423 ( SD = 126) 0.918 0.110 Walking speed (m/s) 0.833 ( SD = 0.168) 0.952 ( SD = 0.160) 0.821 0.003** 

Figure 15: Participant view in application study. Regarding the SUS scores, the Manual Switch method provided higher mean scores than the Activity-based Switch (without signifi-cant difference). Consistently, the majority of participants provided positive feedback for the Manual Switch, with many emphasizing the advantage of switching modalities at arbitrary times (N=5). A minority of participants mentioned the tediousness (N=2) or low ne-cessity (N=2) of switching. In contrast, the Activity-based Switch received mixed feedback. Positive comments highlighted that au-tomatic switching was effortless (N=2) or reasonable (N=1), and participants appreciated the naturalness (N=2) and enhanced focus (N=1) of the reading experience. Conversely, negative comments pointed out the lack of user control over modality selection (N=2) and the disruption of context during transitions (N=2). Regarding participants’ modality switching behavior, as shown in Table 1, the Manual Switch method resulted in fewer switches and longer periods of visual presentation compared to the Activity-based Switch method. Indeed, many participants showed a prefer-ence for visual presentation. Some participants (N=3) mentioned that the ability to use only visual modality was an advantage of Manual Switch, while others (N=3) noted that difficulty in ac-quiring information through auditory presentation was a drawback of Activity-based Switch. This preference may partly reflect the empty and visually uncomplicated corridor, where participants per-ceived relatively little need to switch away from visual reading. Based on these observations, we recommend that modality switch-ing be customizable by users as a hybrid approach combining both automatic and manual switching , rather than being fully au-tomatic. Furthermore, when designing automatic switching, visual presentation should be prioritized as long as safety conditions permit .In contrast, the Activity-based Switch provided a 13.7% slower reading speed but a 14.3% faster walking speed than Manual Switch. The slower reading speed was likely due to the longer du-ration of auditory presentation in the Activity-based Switch. The faster walking speed, as intended, suggests that automatic switch-ing based on walking activity may help prevent distracted walk-ing and enhance perceived safety during locomotion . In fact, one participant explicitly appreciated the unobstructed view of the real environment provided during walking. Since this study utilized a straight corridor with minimal obstacles or pedestrians, the advan-tages of activity-based switching may be more pronounced in real-world situations requiring greater awareness of the environment. Future investigation in such contexts is necessary. 

6 CONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS , AND FUTURE WORK 

We proposed Switched Reading and investigated gaze-based voice playback and a correspondence-aware transition effect through a controlled user study and an application study. These studies yielded the following design implications for the proposed inter-face and possibly similar cross-modality reading systems: • Gaze-based voice playback is recommended , since users generally preferred it and read faster with fewer gaze shifts during modality switching. Optionally replaying sections al-ready read visually may support comprehension, but the sys-tem must avoid starting from unread sections. • The transition effect may be beneficial , since users gener-ally preferred it and perceived support for comprehension, al-though it did not objectively improve reading speed or com-prehension accuracy. Further improvements should reduce the mismatch between visual reading and voice playback speeds and maintain the effect until users have mapped the correspon-dence between modalities. • Visual presentation should be prioritized whenever safety conditions permit , since visual reading is faster and was more favored by users in our application study. However, con-sidering that some users may prefer auditory presentation and irregular context changes may occur, it is advisable to ensure that manual switching options are always available and that users can fine-tune the switching triggers to suit their habits. Nevertheless, our studies were conducted in relatively controlled settings, with predictable 30-second switching intervals and few external interruptions. Therefore, the effects of frequent or unex-pected switching in more complex environments remain unclear. Gaze-estimation errors may also cause playback or highlighting to begin at unintended positions, particularly during locomotion. Fur-thermore, participants differed in their modality and transition pref-erences, suggesting that practical systems should support personal-ization and manual overrides rather than treating the tested settings as universally optimal. In addition, this study was conducted using only Japanese text. While the fundamental design of the proposed interface is likely applicable to other languages, differences in punctuation frequency and the presence/absence of spaces between words may require subtle variations in the design of the transition effect. Finally, our prototype focused mainly on plain text. In reality, books and academic papers often include figures and tables in addi-tion to text. In future work, to make such visual elements accessible in the auditory modality, we plan to explore methods such as con-verting them into descriptive text using large language models. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (JP25K03160). Gen-erative AI tools, including ChatGPT, were used to create text ma-terials for the user study and assist in translating the manuscript from the authors’ local language into English; the final English was checked by a human editor. 9Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

REFERENCES 

[1] A. Bangor, P. T. Kortum, and J. T. Miller. An empirical evaluation of the system usability scale. Intl. Journal of Human–Computer Interac-tion , 24(6):574–594, 2008. 5 [2] S. Chatterjee, K. Scheck, D. K¨ uster, F. Putze, H. Moturu, J. Schering, J. M. G´ omez, and T. Schultz. Smarthelm: Towards multimodal de-tection of attention in an outdoor augmented reality biking scenario. In Companion Publication of the 2020 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction , pp. 426–432, 2020. 1 [3] S. H. Chua, S. T. Perrault, D. J. Matthies, and S. Zhao. Position-ing glass: Investigating display positions of monocular optical see-through head-mounted display. In Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-tional Symposium of Chinese CHI , pp. 1–6, 2016. 1 [4] V. Clinton-Lisell. Listening ears or reading eyes: A meta-analysis of reading and listening comprehension comparisons. In Re-view of Educational Research , pp. 543–582, 2021. doi: 10.3102/ 00346543211060871 2 [5] A. Dancu, V. Vechev, A. A. ¨ Unl¨ uer, S. Nilson, O. Nygren, S. Eliasson, J.-E. Barjonet, J. Marshall, and M. Fjeld. Gesture bike: examining projection surfaces and turn signal systems for urban cycling. In Pro-ceedings of the 2015 international conference on interactive tabletops & surfaces , pp. 151–159, 2015. 1 [6] S. Debernardis, M. Fiorentino, M. Gattullo, G. Monno, and A. E. Uva. Text readability in head-worn displays: Color and style optimization in video versus optical see-through devices. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 20(1):125–139, 2014. doi: 10. 1109/TVCG.2013.86 1, 3 [7] T. Dingler, K. Kunze, and B. Outram. Vr reading uis: Assessing text parameters for reading in vr. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’18, p. 1–6. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3170427.3188695 3 [8] S. Fukushima, T. Hamada, and A. Hautasaari. Comparing world and screen coordinate systems in optical see-through head-mounted dis-plays for text readability while walking. In 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) , pp. 649–658. IEEE, 2020. 1, 2 [9] J. L. Gabbard, J. E. Swan, D. Hix, S.-J. Kim, and G. Fitch. Active text drawing styles for outdoor augmented reality: A user-based study and design implications. In 2007 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference ,pp. 35–42. IEEE, 2007. 1 [10] D. Ghosh, P. S. Foong, S. Zhao, C. Liu, N. Janaka, and V. Erusu. Eyeditor: Towards on-the-go heads-up text editing using voice and manual input. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp. 1–13, 2020. 2 [11] E. Ginters. Augmented reality use for cycling quality improvement. 

Procedia Computer Science , 149:167–176, 2019. 2 [12] M. Gross, J. Dara, C. Meyer, and D. Bolchini. Exploring aural navi-gation by screenless access. In Proceedings of the 15th International Web for All Conference , W4A ’18. Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3192714.3192815 2[13] S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland. Development of nasa-tlx (task load index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. In Advances in psychology , vol. 52, pp. 139–183. Elsevier, 1988. 5 [14] Y.-T. Hsieh, V. Orso, S. Andolina, M. Canaveras, D. Cabral, A. Spag-nolli, L. Gamberini, and G. Jacucci. Interweaving visual and audio-haptic augmented reality for urban exploration. In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference , DIS ’18, p. 215–226. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3196709.3196733 2 [15] Y.-J. Huang, J.-C. Lin, S.-S. Lee, and B.-J. Wu. Reading and walking with smart glasses: Effects of display and control modes on safety. 

International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction , 40(23):7875– 7891, 2024. doi: 10.1080/10447318.2023.2276529 1 [16] N. Janaka, J. Gao, L. Zhu, S. Zhao, L. Lyu, P. Xu, M. Nabokow, S. Wang, and Y. Ong. Glassmessaging: Towards ubiquitous messag-ing using ohmds. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. , 7(3), sep 2023. doi: 10.1145/3610931 1 [17] H.-Y. Jo, L. Seidel, M. Pahud, M. Sinclair, and A. Bianchi. Flowar: How different augmented reality visualizations of online fitness videos support flow for at-home yoga exercises. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’23. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3544548.3580897 1 [18] E. M. Klose, N. A. Mack, J. Hegenberg, and L. Schmidt. Text pre-sentation for augmented reality applications in dual-task situations. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) , pp. 636–644. IEEE, 2019. 2, 8 [19] M. Koelle, M. Kranz, and A. M¨ oller. Don’t look at me that way! un-derstanding user attitudes towards data glasses usage. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services , MobileHCI ’15, p. 362–372. As-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2785830.2785842 1 [20] P.-S. Ku, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-H. Peng, and M. Y. Chen. Peritext: Utilizing peripheral vision for reading text on augmented reality smart glasses. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) , pp. 630–635. IEEE, 2019. 1 [21] M. Kumar, J. Klingner, R. Puranik, T. Winograd, and A. Paepcke. Improving the accuracy of gaze input for interaction. In Proceed-ings of the 2008 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research & Applica-tions , ETRA ’08, p. 65–68. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2008. doi: 10.1145/1344471.1344488 4 [22] Z. Li, C. Gebhardt, Y. Inglin, N. Steck, P. Streli, and C. Holz. Situa-tionadapt: Contextual ui optimization in mixed reality with situation awareness via llm reasoning. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , UIST ’24. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3654777.3676470 3 [23] D. Lindlbauer, A. M. Feit, and O. Hilliges. Context-aware online adaptation of mixed reality interfaces. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ,UIST ’19, p. 147–160. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3332165.3347945 3 [24] H. Liu, S. Cao, and S. Wu. An experimental comparison on read-ing comprehension effect of visual, audio and dual channels. Pro-ceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology ,56(1):716–718, 2019. doi: 10.1002/pra2.148 2 [25] F. Lu and D. A. Bowman. Evaluating the potential of glanceable ar interfaces for authentic everyday uses. In 2021 IEEE virtual reality and 3D user interfaces (VR) , pp. 768–777. IEEE, 2021. 2 [26] F. Lu, S. Davari, L. Lisle, Y. Li, and D. A. Bowman. Glanceable ar: Evaluating information access methods for head-worn augmented reality. In 2020 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user inter-faces (VR) , pp. 930–939. IEEE, 2020. 1, 2, 8 [27] F. Lu, L. Pavanatto, and D. A. Bowman. In-the-wild experiences with an interactive glanceable ar system for everyday use. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium on Spatial User Interaction , SUI ’23. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3607822.3614515 2 [28] A. Lucero and A. Vetek. Notifeye: using interactive glasses to deal with notifications while walking in public. In Proceedings of the 11th conference on advances in computer entertainment technology , pp. 1– 10, 2014. 2 [29] Y. Matsuura, T. Terada, T. Aoki, S. Sonoda, N. Isoyama, and M. Tsukamoto. Readability and legibility of fonts considering shak-iness of head mounted displays. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM international symposium on wearable computers , pp. 150–159, 2019. 1[30] A. Matviienko, F. M¨ uller, D. Sch¨ on, P. Seesemann, S. G¨ unther, and M. M¨ uhlh¨ auser. Bikear: Understanding cyclists’ crossing decision-making at uncontrolled intersections using augmented reality. In Pro-ceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-ing Systems , pp. 1–15, 2022. 1 [31] Microsoft. Microsoft hololens—mixed reality technology for busi-ness, 2019. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens . 3 [32] J. Orlosky, K. Kiyokawa, and H. Takemura. Dynamic text manage-ment for see-through wearable and heads-up display systems. In Pro-

10 Accepted for publication at IEEE ISMAR 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

ceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Intelligent User In-terfaces , IUI ’13, p. 363–370. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2013. doi: 10.1145/2449396.2449443 1, 2 [33] J. Orlosky, K. Kiyokawa, and H. Takemura. Managing mobile text in head mounted displays: studies on visual preference and text place-ment. ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review , 18(2):20–31, 2014. 1, 2 [34] A. Oulasvirta, S. Tamminen, V. Roto, and J. Kuorelahti. Interaction in 4-second bursts: the fragmented nature of attentional resources in mo-bile hci. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pp. 919–928, 2005. 2 [35] S. G. Patel, C.-O. Dufresne-Camaro, Y. Sakamoto, K. Fan, K. Hasan, and P. Irani. On the road to productivity: Investigating text-presentation techniques and audio assistance for non-driving tasks in conditionally automated vehicles. In Proceedings of the 22nd Interna-tional Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia , MUM ’23, p. 122–133. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3626705.3627787 1, 2 [36] R. Rohani Ghahari, J. George-Palilonis, H. Gahangir, L. N. Kaser, and D. Bolchini. Semi-aural interfaces: Investigating voice-controlled aural flows. Interacting with Computers , 28(6):826–842, 2016. 2 [37] R. Rzayev, S. Korbely, M. Maul, A. Schark, V. Schwind, and N. Henze. Effects of position and alignment of notifications on ar glasses during social interaction. In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society , NordiCHI ’20. Association for Computing Machin-ery, New York, NY, USA, 2020. doi: 10.1145/3419249.3420095 1 [38] R. Rzayev, P. W. Wo´ zniak, T. Dingler, and N. Henze. Reading on smart glasses: The effect of text position, presentation type and walk-ing. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’18, p. 1–9. Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3173574.3173619 1, 2, 8 [39] G. Schiavo, N. Mana, O. Mich, M. Zancanaro, and R. Job. Attention-driven read-aloud technology increases reading comprehension in children with reading disabilities. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 37(3):875–886, 2021. 2 [40] K. Vadas, N. Patel, K. Lyons, T. Starner, and J. Jacko. Reading on-the-go: a comparison of audio and hand-held displays. In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile De-vices and Services , MobileHCI ’06, p. 219–226. Association for Com-puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2006. doi: 10.1145/1152215 .1152262 1, 2 [41] R. Wang, Z. Potter, Y. Ho, D. Killough, L. Zeng, S. Mondal, and Y. Zhao. Gazeprompt: Enhancing low vision people’s reading ex-perience with gaze-aware augmentations. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’24. As-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3613904.3642878 4 [42] C. Wei, D. Yu, and T. Dingler. Reading on 3d surfaces in virtual environments. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) , pp. 721–728, 2020. doi: 10.1109/VR46266. 2020.00095 3 [43] J. O. Wobbrock, L. Findlater, D. Gergle, and J. J. Higgins. The aligned rank transform for nonparametric factorial analyses using only anova procedures. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human fac-tors in computing systems , pp. 143–146, 2011. 6 [44] T. Yang, M. Ferati, Y. Liu, R. Rohani Ghahari, and D. Bolchini. Au-ral browsing on-the-go: listening-based back navigation in large web architectures. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’12, p. 277–286. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2012. doi: 10.1145/ 2207676.2207715 2 [45] C.-H. Yu. Mobile continuous reading. In CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp. 1405–1410, 2012. doi: 10.1145/2212776.2212463 1, 2, 3, 5 [46] G. Zhao, X. Hu, J. Orlosky, and K. Kiyokawa. Rear indicators: Periph-eral cycling indicators for rear-approaching hazards. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ,pp. 1–9, 2024. 1 [47] G. Zhao, J. Orlosky, J. Gabbard, and K. Kiyokawa. Hazardsnap: Gazed-based augmentation delivery for safe information access while cycling. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics ,pp. 1–10, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2023.3333336 1 [48] C. Zhou, K. Fennedy, F. F.-Y. Tan, S. Zhao, and Y. Shao. Not all spac-ings are created equal: The effect of text spacings in on-the-go reading using optical see-through head-mounted displays. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,CHI ’23. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3544548.3581430 1, 2 [49] C. Zhou, Z. Yan, A. Ram, Y. Gu, Y. Xiang, C. Liu, Y. Huang, W. T. Ooi, and S. Zhao. Glassmail: Towards personalised wearable assis-tant for on-the-go email creation on smart glasses. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference , DIS ’24, p. 372–390. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3643834.3660683 1 [50] Q. Zhou, L. Grebel, A. Irlitti, J. A. Minaai, J. Goncalves, and E. Vel-loso. Here and now: Creating improvisational dance movements with a mixed reality mirror. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’23. Association for Com-puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3544548 .3580666 1 

11