Title: SGAP-Gaze: Scene Grid Attention Based Point-of-Gaze Estimation Network for Driver Gaze

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.19888v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 00:10:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
> 1

# SGAP-Gaze: Scene Grid Attention Based Point-of-Gaze Estimation Network for Driver Gaze 

Pavan Kumar Sharma, Pranamesh Chakraborty, Member, IEEE 

Abstract —Driver gaze estimation is essential for understanding the driver’s situational awareness of surrounding traffic. Existing gaze estimation models use driver facial information to predict the Point-of-Gaze (PoG) or the 3D gaze direction vector. We propose a benchmark dataset, Urban Driving-Face Scene Gaze (UD-FSG), comprising synchronized driver-face and traffic-scene images. The scene images provide cues about surrounding traffic, which can help improve the gaze estimation model, along with the face images. We propose SGAP-Gaze, Scene-Grid Attention based Point-of-Gaze estimation network, trained and tested on our UD-FSG dataset, which explicitly incorporates the scene images into the gaze estimation modelling. The gaze estimation network integrates driver face, eye, iris, and scene contextual information. First, the extracted features from facial modalities are fused to form a gaze intent vector. Then, attention scores are computed over the spatial scene grid using a Transformer-based attention mechanism fusing face and scene image features to obtain the PoG. The proposed SGAP-Gaze model achieves a mean pixel error of 104.73 on the UD-FSG dataset and 63.48 on LBW dataset, achieving a 23.5% reduction in mean pixel error compared to state-of-the-art driver gaze estimation models. The spatial pixel distribution analysis shows that SGAP-Gaze consistently achieves lower mean pixel error than existing methods across all spatial ranges, including the outer regions of the scene, which are rare but critical for understanding driver attention. These results highlight the effectiveness of integrating multi-modal gaze cues with scene-aware attention for a robust driver PoG estimation model in real-world driving environments. 

Index Terms —Gaze estimation, transformer, point-of-gaze, driver attention, scene-aware attention 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Road user safety remains a major global concern, particu-larly in developing countries like India, where heterogeneous traffic conditions and poor lane discipline significantly in-crease safety risks. In such environments, smaller vehicles (e.g., motorbikes and autorickshaws) typically do not strictly follow lane discipline and frequently maneuver through gaps to overtake other vehicles. This unpredictable traffic behavior makes driving more challenging for all other road users. Consequently, safe driving in these conditions heavily depends on the driver’s ability to continuously monitor the surrounding environment and rapidly allocate visual attention to relevant regions of the scene. Inattentive driving in such a complex traffic environment may increase the likelihood of crashes or near misses [1], [2]. According to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH, 2023), nearly 4.8 lakh 

Pavan Kumar Sharma and Pranamesh Chakraborty are with the Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur-208016, India (e-mail: pavans20@iitk.ac.in; pranames@iitk.ac.in). Corresponding author: Pranamesh Chakraborty. 

road accidents occurred in India in 2023 [3]. Although several factors contribute to these accidents, one of them is the driver’s lack of situational awareness of the surrounding traffic [4], [5]. A driver monitoring system that monitors the driver’s visual attention using gaze information (gaze position in the scene, fixation time, duration, etc.) [6], [7] can help to improve driver safety by alerting the driver. Although the automobile industry has made significant advancements in driver safety features, including Driver Monitoring Systems (DMS), these systems are primarily designed to detect in-cabin distractions and typical functionalities include identifying behaviors such as mobile phone usage (talking or texting), head pose deviation, and drowsiness detection (based on blink rate or eye closure patterns) [4], [8]–[10]. While such systems improve driver safety, they primarily focus on external driver states rather than assessing whether the driver is attending to the surrounding traffic environment. A driver gaze monitoring system first requires estimating driver gaze accurately, which is then used to measure the visual attention. Driver gaze estimation is typically performed by mounting one or more cameras on the dashboard to determine where the driver is gazing. This non-intrusive gaze-monitoring enables scalable deployment in the real world, unlike the intrusive method, which requires the driver to wear an eye tracker [11]. Driver gaze representation is also an important aspect of gaze estimation. In the literature, driver gaze is typically represented in three common ways: (a) zone-based gaze classification, (b) gaze vector and/or Point of Gaze (PoG), and (c) object-based gaze estimation [11]. In the zone-based approach, the windshield is divided into predefined regions, and the model uses face features to classify the driver’s gaze into one of these zones [12]. In the gaze vector–based approach, gaze is represented as a 3D gaze vector originating from the driver’s eyes. Model performance is evaluated by computing the angular error between the predicted gaze vector and the ground truth gaze vector [13]–[15]. When this vector is projected onto the driving scene, it indicates the location (point) on the scene at which the driver is looking, and also known as the Point of Gaze (PoG) [2]. In object based gaze estimation, driver gaze is represented in terms of the object on which driver is looking. The gaze vector and/or PoG is commonly modeled using prob-abilistic [14], deep learning, and more recently, transformer-based approaches [16], [17]. Several studies estimate driver gaze by regressing facial and/or eye features, but none have incorporated scene information as an additional spatial input alongside face and eye features. Cheng et al. [15] proposed GazePTR (Gaze Pyramid Transformer), which, instead of 

> arXiv:2604.19888v1 [cs.CV] 21 Apr 2026 2

relying solely on the final feature map, collects multi-level face features and feeds them into a transformer encoder. Some recent studies estimate the gaze vector (gaze direction) and represent the driver’s visual attention by creating a scene saliency map [14], [16], [18], [19]. In a driving simulated study, Hu et al. [19] used the SalGAN adversarial framework for saliency map estimation, incorporating an element-wise sigmoid to interpret each pixel as a probability. A study by Kasahara et al. [14] developed a self-supervised-based algorithm to estimate 3D gaze direction and scene saliency. This study used the ETH-XGaze model based on ResNet-50 for gaze vector and the Unisal (MNetV2-RNN-Decoder) for scene saliency map. Study by Jha et al. [16] proposed a two-branch deep learning model in which a fully connected head-pose encoder and a CNN-based eye encoder are fused, followed by a multi-stage upsampling decoder. Instead of di-rectly regressing coordinates, the model predicts a probabilistic 2D visual attention heatmap over the scene. The 3D gaze vector or PoG is typically estimated using cameras facing the driver. The existing open-source driver gaze datasets rely on driver-facing cameras and only a few provide ground-truth gaze vectors. The majority of existing datasets are zone-based and collected in a parked-vehicle environment. Although driver face is the primary requirement for estimating driver gaze, however, the gaze estimation can be made more robust and accurate, if scene information is present [5], [20], [21]. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, only one dataset, LBW (Look Both Ways), includes both face and scene images, collected in homogeneous real-world driving scenarios [14]. However, the scene in the dataset is limited to very few vehicles or traffic agents in the surrounding traffic. Therefore, there is a need for a large-scale driver gaze dataset with driver face and scene camera data collected in a dynamic driving environment with enough traffic agents present. This can help to build a state-of-the-art, robust driver gaze estimation model. Since existing driver gaze datasets are based on camera facing the driver, the gaze estimation models are developed based on the driver face information only [22]–[24]. Even though the LBW dataset contains both face and scene information, the scene information is used to create a scene saliency map rather than being used directly as input for gaze estimation [14]. However, studies on driver visual behavior have shown that gaze is influenced by the surrounding scene, such as the positions of vehicles [5], [20], [21]. Therefore, incorporating scene information can improve gaze estimation models. To address these limitations, we have collected a diverse real-world driving gaze dataset called Urban Driving -F ace Scene 

Gaze ( UD-FSG ), in heterogeneous traffic environments. It comprises synchronous driver face images, scene images, and eye-tracker data to obtain gaze ground truth on the scene image. Using this dataset, we propose a gaze estimation model that directly incorporates scene information and driver facial information as inputs. The driver’s face, eye, and iris are first detected using a custom YOLOv8 (You Only Look Once version 8) Face-Eye-Iris (FEI) detector. Then, we extract face features and iris-weighted eye features using a pretrained ResNet (Residual Networks) convolutional neural network (CNN) model. On the other hand, the driving scene is processed using a ResNet-based feature extractor to obtain spatially distributed feature representations, where each feature corresponds to a localized region (grid) of the scene. The extracted features from facial modalities are then fused to form a gaze intent vector. Attention scores are computed over spatial scene grids using a Transformer-based attention mechanism that fuses both face and scene information. The point of gaze (PoG) is then obtained as the expectation of the scene grid centers under the normalized attention distribution. Overall, the key contributions of our study are as follows: 1) A large-scale driver gaze dataset has been created, col-lected in a heterogeneous traffic environment, which contains driver face images, scene images, and 2D gaze coordinates for ground truth. 2) An improved eye feature representation using an iris-weighted Gaussian function, which emphasizes the iris region and helps capture the iris movement pattern within the eye image. 3) We propose a scene grid attention-based point of gaze (SGAP-Gaze) estimation network that explicitly incorpo-rates the scene information along with the driver’s face for gaze estimation purposes. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the datasets used in this study, followed by Section 3, which presents the proposed methodology, including the complete pipeline of the gaze estimation model and its imple-mentation details. Section 4 reports the experimental results, including a comparison of model performance with state-of-the-art methods. At last, we have concludes the key findings and discussed the strengths and limitations of the proposed gaze estimation approach. II. D ATASET 

Data collection in real driving environments presents several practical challenges, including reflections from sunglasses, glare due to sunlight, and poor illumination under low-light conditions. Such factors are typically absent or inadequately represented in simulated driving environments. In this study, we separately train and test our model on two different datasets to evaluate the robustness and generalization capability of the proposed gaze estimation model. The first dataset is our propose UD-FSG dataset and the second is the existing bench-mark LBW (Look Both Ways) dataset [14] for the comparison purpose. In this section, we provide a detailed description of our UD-FSG dataset. 

1) Sensor Setup: An instrumented vehicle (IV) equipped with different sensors has been used for data collection purposes. Two USB webcams, as shown in Fig. 1a were mounted to capture the driver’s face and scene image simultaneously. Both cameras are synced via a G-Streamer application, and their outputs were stored on a high-RAM personal computer placed inside the IV. Fig. 1b shows an example of face and scene images captured by the corresponding face and scene cameras simultaneously. To obtain the driver’s gaze ground truth, each driver wore a Pupil Invisible eye tracker during the entire data collection period. The eyetracker and the cameras were synced using UNIX timestamps. 3 

> Fig. 1: Overview of the data collection setup: (a) Installation of face and scene cameras (b) Captured driver face and scene images

2) Participants: The present study requires driver face and gaze information in addition to the forward traffic scene to build the driver gaze estimation model. Since this study involves human participants (drivers), ethical approval was obtained from the Institute Ethics Committee before conduct-ing the study. Each participant provided informed consent by signing a consent form before the data collection process be-gan. This study recruited 35 male professional drivers to drive the instrumented vehicle. The dataset includes the following driver statistics: mean age = 35.77 years (SD = 6.30) and mean driving experience = 13.7 years (SD = 5.85). 

3) Driver Gaze Ground Truth Creation: The eye tracker worn by the driver, as shown in Fig. 2a, provides the gaze information overlaid on the camera fitted with the tracker. Fig. 2b shows the image captured by the eye tracker scene camera, and the red circle indicates the gaze location. However, it should be noted that the eye tracker camera is moving with the head movement of the driver, while our objective is to identify the driver’s gaze on the scene camera, which is fixed on the dashboard. Therefore, our next objective is to transform the gaze coordinates from the eye tracker scene camera to the fixed dashboard scene camera. The following procedure has been adopted to transform the 2D gaze coordinate from the eye tracker scene camera to the dashboard scene camera. 1) Visual markers (AprilTags) were placed on the dashboard and windshield area, so that at least three to four markers were visible in the eye tracker’s scene image, as shown in Fig. 2c. 2) Before recording data for each driver, the driver’s scene was scanned by manually moving the eye tracker to capture the maximum possible windshield and dashboard area. From this scan, a reference image was selected that contained the maximum number of clearly visi-ble markers (Fig. 2c). The 2D gaze coordinates were then transformed using the Marker Mapper visualization toolkit of Pupil Labs (Pupil Invisible Eye Tracker) with respect to the fixed reference image. 3) Subsequently, the reference image coordinate is trans-formed from the fixed reference image ( x1, y1) into the dashboard scene camera image ( x2, y2) using the homography matrix (as shown in Fig. 2d). The transformed image coordinates were also manually veri-fied by drawing a circle on the scene images to qualitatively ensure that the gaze coordinates were correctly mapped from the eye tracker to the dashboard scene camera image.  

> Fig. 2: Transformation of gaze coordinate from eyetracker’s scene image to dashboard scene camera image using homography matrix.

4) Dataset Details: The data were collected at different time of the day in Kanpur city, India, across arterial and sub-arterial roads to incorporate variations in sunlight on driver face and traffic density in the dataset. Each driver drove approximately one hour, covering a travel distance of about 30–35 km. The data were originally recorded at 10 frames per second (FPS), and frames are extracted at 5 FPS to create this dataset. Therefore, the propose UD-FSG dataset is a large-scale benchmark real driving gaze dataset comprising data from 35 drivers, which includes 3,73,488 driver face and scene image pairs along with 2D gaze ground truth coordinates. A detailed comparison of our dataset with existing benchmark datasets is presented in Table I. From this Table I, it can be seen that most existing gaze datasets are based on gaze zones, which comprise driver faces along with gaze ground truth. To the authors’ knowledge, the UD-FSG dataset is the second dataset, which consists of driver face images, scene images, and corresponding gaze coordinates. However, our dataset is significantly larger than the LBW dataset and includes more variation in traffic density and lighting conditions, as shown in Fig. 3. The traffic environment consisting of diverse dynamic traffic agents (vehicles, pedestrians, etc.) makes the scene information meaningful and challenging enough to develop a robust driver gaze estimation model. Also, the eye tracker looks like regular prescription glasses, making the face image similar to that observed during real-world driving tasks. This data has been used to train our propose SGAP-Gaze model. The distribution of driver gaze points in the scene is plotted in Fig. 4a by considering the image size equal to the scene image size ( 1280 × 720 ). To understand the spread of gaze points across the scene, a gaze density heatmap is also plotted by aggregating gaze points over 5 × 5 pixel region. Fig. 4b shows that driver gaze is concentrated in the middle regions (driver forward scene), which is expected, since the driver is predominantly looking in the forward regions while driving. However, our dataset also comprises images in which gaze is distributed across the lateral edges of the scene camera (i.e., 

x < 200 or x > 1000 pixels), making it suitable for modeling driver gaze toward the corners of the windshield. The UD-FSG dataset is available at the following link: https://github. com/pavans20/Urban-Driving-Face-Scene-Gaze-Dataset.git. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

We propose a scene grid attention based framework for driver point-of-gaze (PoG) estimation that jointly leverages facial 4                                                     

> TABLE I: Comparison between benchmark driver gaze datasets.
> Name Face/Scene Subjects Size GZ/PoG Scenario DrivFace [25] Y/N 4606 3Real LISA GAZE v2 [26] Y/N 10 47k 7Parked DG-UNICAMP [27] Y/N 45 1M 18 Parked DGW [23] Y/N 338 50k 9Parked DMD [28] Y/N 37 41h 9Real+Sim ET-DGAZE [29] Y/N 40 12k 9Parked DR(eye)VE [30] N/Y 8555k PoG Real LBW [14] Y/Y 28 123k PoG Real
> UD-FSG (Ours) Y/Y 35 373k PoG Real GZ: Gaze Zones; PoG: Point-of-Gaze; k: Thousand; M: Million; h: Hours; Y: Yes; N: No; Sim: Simulated.
> Fig. 3: Sample face–scene image pairs from the UD-FSG dataset, illustrating variations in traffic density and lighting conditions.
> Fig. 4: Visualization of driver gaze point distribution of UD-FSG dataset

appearance including face features, eye features, and iris location and scene context. Instead of directly regressing gaze coordinates, the proposed approach formulates gaze estima-tion as a problem over spatial scene regions. The proposed architecture consists of four major components: (1) Facial geometry detection module (2) Multi-stream feature extraction module (3) Multi modal feature fusion module, and (4) Gaze prediction head. Also to compared with existing 3D gaze direction estimation state-of-the-art methods, we also estimate the 3d gaze direction vector using only the facial features similar to used in proposed PoG estimation. The pipeline of the proposed driver gaze estimation framework is shown in Fig. 5. 

Problem Formulation: Given synchronized inputs of a facial image ( F ) and the corresponding scene image ( S), the gaze location ( gaze ) is modeled as a function of the face features and scene features: 

gaze = f (F, S) (1) Since facial image consists of multiple features at various scales, including eyes, facial feature extraction has been further divided into: (i) Multi-level face features and (ii) Left and right eye features ( eL and eR). We next discuss the details of the extraction of facial regions, followed by multi-level feature extraction and feature fusion. 

A. Facial Geometry Extraction Module 

The facial image captured from the dashboard face camera contains a face region with context, as shown in Fig. 3. To separate out the context from the face image, we developed a custom Face, Eye, Iris (FEI) detection model to detect the face, eye, and iris regions. A YOLOv8 pretrained model was trained for FEI detection using 2200 annotated face images, obtained from 481 drivers. This data has been obtained from different existing zone-based driver gaze datasets [23], [28], [29], [31]. The FEI model achieved mAP (mean average precision) of 95.7%, at a 0.5 confidence interval and a recall of 93.0%. Using this FEI model, first we detect the face, eyes, and iris regions from each face image ( F ). Using the eye and iris bounding box information, we also compute the center coordinates of the iris relative to the top-left corner of the eye for both eyes. In cases, where only one iris is detected, we leverage the physiological principle of conjugate eye move-ment [32] to infer the spatial coordinates of the undetected iris from the detected one. It might be possible in some cases both iris is not detected because of real-world driving challenges (e.g., occlusion, blur, extreme head pose, or illumination variations). In such cases, we incorporate a validity-based gating mechanism. When reliable iris coordinates are unavailable, the iris input is neutralized, and its contribution is suppressed during feature fusion, preventing noisy or misleading signals from affecting gaze estimation. Consequently, the model adaptively relies on facial appearance, eye features, and scene context, ensuring robust and stable performance even in the absence of iris. 

B. Multi-Stream Feature Extraction Module 

The multi-stream feature extraction module processes differ-ent inputs using separate streams, where each stream learns features from face, eye, iris, and scene data. 

1) Face Feature Extraction: We employ a pretrained ResNet-18 backbone as a hierarchical feature encoder to obtain compact and discriminative facial representations for gaze estimation. The detected face image is first resized to If ∈

R3×224 ×224 to fit the ResNet architecture input configuration. This resized image is then normalized and forwarded through the convolutional stem and the four residual stages of ResNet-18 are used to extract intermediate feature maps. Here, the convolutional stem refers to the initial layers that extract low-level visual features, while the residual stages consist of stacked residual blocks (also called Layer-1/2/3/4) that progressively learn higher-level representations. This can be represented as: 

Fl = Bl(If ), l ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4} (2) where, Bl(·) denotes the transformation up to the lth residual block, Fl ∈ RCl×Hl×Wl denotes each feature map with chan-nel dimensions Cl ∈ { 64 , 128 , 256 , 512 } for l ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4},and Hl, Wl represent the spatial resolution (height and width) of the feature map. Since the channel dimensions (D) Cl differ 5Multi Layer Face Features Left & Right Eye Features Iris Centre (𝑥 𝐿 , 𝑦 𝐿 , 𝑥 𝑅 , 𝑦 𝑅 )        

> Scene Features (7×7grids) Feature Extractor Feature Extractor FEI Det. Iris Centre ( 𝑥 𝐿 ,𝑦 𝐿 ,𝑥 𝑅 ,𝑦 𝑅 )
> PoG Prediction Head PoGPrediction Fused Gaze FP (D) Feature Extractor Scene FP (D) GW Features Gaze Direction Head 3D Gaze Direction Vector G.F.

Fig. 5: Proposed driver gaze estimation pipeline fusing face and scene information using transformer. 

across layers, we project each feature map into a unified 256-D embedding space using a learnable 1 × 1 convolution: 

ˆFl = ϕl(Fl), ˆFl ∈ R256 ×Hl×Wl (3) where, ϕl(·) represents the channel projection operation. Finally, to obtain a compact global representation, adaptive global average pooling (GAP) is applied over the spatial dimensions to produce a 256-D feature vector from each layer, represented as fl = GAP( ˆFl) ∈ R256 , where each channel response is computed as: 

fl = GAP ( ˆFl)c = 1

HlWlHlX

> i=1
> Wl

X

> j=1

ˆFl(c, i, j ) (4) where, c ∈ { 1, . . . , 256 } denotes the channel index of the projected feature map. Thus, for each face image, four hierarchical global facial feature vectors {f1, f 2, f 3, f 4}, each of 256-D, are extracted from different semantic depths of the network. These multi-level global embeddings capture complementary facial infor-mation, ranging from fine-grained texture patterns in shallow layers to high-level structural semantics in deeper layers, as shown in Fig. 6. The resulting 256-D global representations are subsequently utilized in the proposed multi-modal feature fusion module for gaze prediction. 

Fig. 6: Visualization of face features extracted from different layers of ResNet-18 for three drivers. 

2) Gaussian-Weighted Eye Feature Extraction: Along with the overall face features, the eyes, in addition with the iris position, are extremely important to determine the gaze lo-cation of the participants. Therefore, we design an efficient feature extraction of the eye region, detected using our FEI model, along with the iris position. First, the eye features are extracted using a pretrained ResNet-18 backbone, where the final residual block (layer4) is employed to obtain high-level semantic features. However, since the cropped eye images from FEI detection do not meet the required 224×224 input resolution of the ResNet architecture, we applied resizing followed by constant padding to preserve the aspect-ratio requirement. A padding value of 114 is selected as a neutral grey intensity to minimise artificial boundary effects and prevent unintended feature activations in the padded regions. Fig. 7 shows a sample images of the original left and right eye images, along with the padded images used as input for ResNet model. The padded left and right eye images, with dimensions of each Ie ∈ R3×224 ×224 , is then normalized and forwarded through the convolutional stem and residual layers of ResNet-18 separately for left and right eyes and producing a deep feature map for left and right eye. 

Fe = B4(Ie), Fe ∈ R512 ×H4×W4 (5) Similar to the facial feature extraction module, a 1 × 1 convo-lutional projection is applied to reduce the channel dimensions to 256. 

ˆFe = ϕ4(Fe), ˆFe ∈ R256 ×H4×W4 (6) To emphasize the iris region derived from FEI model within the eye feature map, a spatial Gaussian weighting function centered at the iris location is applied. Let (cx, c y ) denote the projected iris center coordinates in feature map space. The 2D Gaussian weight at spatial location (x, y ) is defined as: 

G(x, y ) = exp 



− (x−cx)2+( y−cy )2

> 2σ2

PHi=1 

PWj=1 exp 



− (i−cx)2+( j−cy )2

> 2σ2

 (7) where, σ (= 1.2 in our experiment) controls the spread of the Gaussian distribution. This normalized weighting map assigns higher importance to features closer to the iris center while suppressing peripheral regions. The Gaussian-weighted feature map is then computed as: 

˜Fe(c, x, y ) = ˆFe(c, x, y ) · G(x, y ) (8) where, c denotes the channel index. Finally, a global repre-sentation is obtained via adaptive global average pooling: 

E = GAP( ˜Fe) ∈ R256 (9) where, GAP( ˜Fe) is computed using similar equation 4. Note that E is represented for separate left and right eyes and indicated as eL and eR. Fig. 7 provides the samples images for each step of eye feature extraction. This Gaussian-weighted global embedding enhances iris-centered discriminative in-6

formation while retaining contextual eye features, making it particularly suitable for precise gaze estimation.           

> Fig. 7: Visualization of eye features extracted from Layer-4 of ResNet-18 with constant padding value of 114, comparing un-weighted and Gaussian-weighted feature responses emphasizing the iris region.

3) Scene Feature Extraction: The scene image contains the contextual information of the driving environment, which influences the driver gaze. To extract this information, we employ a pretrained ResNet-18 backbone as a spatial feature extractor, and features are extracted from final residual block (Layer-4). Given a scene image of size 1280 × 720 , the image is first resized Is ∈ R3×224 ×224 , and normalized using ImageNet statistics before being forwarded through the convolutional stem and residual stages of ResNet-18. Unlike standard classification settings, the GAP and fully connected layers are removed in order to preserve spatial structure. The backbone therefore, produces a deep spatial feature map: 

Fs = B4(Is), Fs ∈ R512 ×7×7, (10) where, B4(·) represents the convolutional feature extractor and the spatial resolution is reduced to 7 × 7 due to progressive down sampling. To obtain a compact and unified embedding space, a 1 × 1 convolutional projection is applied to reduce the channel dimension from 512 to 256: 

ˆFs = ϕ4(Fs), ˆFs ∈ R256 ×7×7 (11) where ϕ4(·) denotes the learnable channel projection. The spatial feature map is then reshaped into a sequence of grid-based tokens by flattening the spatial dimensions, Ts =

reshape ( ˆFs) ∈ R49 ×256 , where each of the 49 tokens corre-sponds to a spatial scene grid in the 7 × 7 feature map. More formally, for spatial location (i, j ), tk = ˆFs(: , i, j ), k =7( i − 1) + j, with tk ∈ R256 representing the contextual embedding of a specific scene region. These grid-based scene tokens preserve spatial correspondence between image regions and feature embeddings, enabling the subsequent Multi-Modal Feature Fusion module to regions about, where the driver is likely looking within the scene. The resulting representation 

Ts ∈ R49 ×256 is stored and used as structured spatial context for gaze prediction. 

C. Multi-Modal Feature Fusion 

The multi-modal feature fusion refers to the process of com-bining features from multiple input modalities such as face appearance, eye features, iris position, and scene context into a unified representation that captures the gaze information. 

1) Facial Features Representation: It includes the features from face, eye and iris coordinates. 

Face Feature Encoding: Face features extracted using four different layers of a CNN backbone are computed using Equation 4 and are represented as four global feature vectors 

f1, f 2, f 3, f 4 ∈ R256 . These features are concatenated and projected into a unified face embedding using the following equation: 

zf ace = LN(ReLU( Wf ace [f1 ; f2 ; f3 ; f4] + bf ace )) (12) where, zf ace ∈ R256 , LN( ·) denotes Layer Normalization, ReLU is the activation function, and Wf ace and bf ace are the learnable weight matrix and bias vector respectively. 

Eye Feature Fusion: Left and right eye features eL, e R ∈ R256 ,computed using Equation 9 are concatenated and embedded as: 

zeye ∈ R256 using the similar as shown in Equation 12. This representation captures fine-grained eye-driven gaze cues. 

Iris Feature Embedding: Iris centers from both eyes are represented as normalized coordinates: 

ic = [ cx,L , c y,L , c x,R , c y,R ] ∈ R4 (13) where, (cx,L , c y,L ) and (cx,R , c y,R ) represent the left and right iris center coordinates respectively. These are projected to capture subtle eye movement corrections: 

ziris = LN (ReLU ( Wiris ic + biris )) ∈ R256 (14) 

2) Gaze Intent Representation: The modality-specific embed-dings are concatenated to form a joint gaze descriptor: 

zcat = [ zf ace ; zeye ; ziris ] ∈ R768 (15) A gaze encoder compresses this representation into a unified gaze-intent vector: 

zgaze = LN (ReLU ( Wgaze zcat + bgaze )) ∈ R256 (16) 

zgaze represents the driver latent gaze intention and serves as the query in the attention computation over the scene grid. 

3) Scene Representation: The scene image is passed through a pretrained ResNet-18 backbone, producing a spatial feature map of size 7×7 as per Equation 11. This results in 49 spatial features si ∈ R256 , i = 1 , . . . , 49 , each corresponding to a different grid of the scene. To incorporate spatial information, each feature is associated with a normalized grid center ci =(xi, y i), where xi, y i are normalized to lie between 0 and 1. The horizontal position is encoded by concatenating the x-coordinate with the feature vector: ˜si = [ si || xi].

D. Gaze Prediction Head 1) 3D Gaze Direction Estimation: The 3D gaze direction is regressed directly from the fused gaze embedding zgaze ∈

R256 . A fully connected layer projects this embedding into a 3-dimensional vector: 

ˆg = Wdzgaze + bd (17) where, Wd ∈ R3×256 and bd ∈ R3 are learnable parameters. Since gaze direction represents orientation in 3D space, the predicted vector is normalized to unit length: 

ˆg = ˆg

∥ˆg∥2

(18) Similarly, normalized ground-truth gaze vector g is obtained. 

2) Attention based Point of Gaze Prediction: PoG estimation involves fusing the face and scene grid, therfore to achieve this gaze intent vector, zgaze is obtained from face image and used 7

as a query vector, while the scene features are projected into key vectors ki = Wk˜si, where, Wk is a learnable projection matrix and ˜si represents the feature vector of the i-th scene grid. Each key, ki therefore corresponds to a spatial region in the scene represented by a grid with a predefined center coordinate. Attention scores between query vector and key vector are computed via dot-product similarity: 

αi = exp( z⊤

> gaze

ki)

PNj=1 exp( z⊤

> gaze

kj ) (19) The attention weight αi reflects the relevance between the gaze representation and the i-th scene grid. The final PoG is then obtained as the weighted average of the predefined grid center coordinates of the scene regions. 

ˆp =

> N

X

> i=1

αici (20) where, ci = (xi, y i) represents the normalized center co-ordinates of the ith scene grid in the scene image, and 

i = 1 , 2, . . . , 49 .

Vertical Residual Correction: To compensate for grid dis-cretization and vertical bias, a learnable residual is applied: 

∆p = λ tanh( Wpzgaze ) (21) where, λ is a learnable scaling factor. The final gaze prediction: 

ˆPf inal = clip (ˆp + ∆ p, 0, 1) (22) 

3) Loss Functions: The loss of 3D gaze direction and PoG is computed using following loss function. 

Gaze Direction Loss: To ensure stable convergence and accurate angular prediction, we adopt a hybrid cosine and Euclidean loss. First, cosine similarity between predicted and ground-truth gaze vectors is computed as: 

Lcos = 1 − (ˆ g · g) (23) This directly penalizes angular deviation. Additionally, an L2

regression term is introduced: 

LL2 = ∥ˆg − g∥2 (24) The final direction loss is defined as: 

Ldir = λ1 Lcos + λ2 LL2 (25) where λ1 = 0 .7 and λ2 = 0 .3 are weighting coefficients that balance the contribution of the cosine similarity loss Lcos and the Euclidean (L2) loss LL2 in the gaze direction supervision. This hybrid formulation improves training stability while preserving strong angular supervision. 

Point-of-Gaze Regression Loss: We have used a Smooth L1 loss for PoG estimation. Let ˆp = (ˆ u, ˆv) denote the predicted normalized PoG and p = ( u, v ) the ground-truth normalized PoG. We supervise PoG estimation using Smooth L1 loss: 

Lpog =

( 12β ∥ˆp − p∥22, ∥ˆp − p∥ < β 

∥ˆp − p∥1 − β 

> 2

, otherwise (26) A small transition parameter β = 0 .02 is used to emphasize fine-grained spatial refinement. 

4) Evaluation Metrics: Compute angular error and pixel error. 

Angular Error: Performance of 3D gaze direction estimation is evaluated using mean angular error (in degrees). The an-gular deviation between predicted and ground-truth vectors is computed as: 

θ = cos −1 (clip (ˆ g · g, −1, 1)) × 180 

π (27) The final reported metric is the average angular error of all set of test data of all samples. 

Pixel Error: Predicted normalized PoG coordinates are con-verted to pixel space: upx = ˆ u·Wimg , vpx = ˆ v·Himg where, 

Wimg and Himg denote image width and height, respectively. Pixel error is then computed as: 

Epixel = ∥ˆppx − ppx ∥2 (28) The reported value corresponds to the mean Euclidean distance in pixels across all set of test data of all samples. The proposed model is trained using the PyTorch framework on a GPU server with four NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 GPUs (10 GB VRAM each) and CUDA 11.4. IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

In this section, we first discuss the performance of the 3D gaze direction estimation model and compare its results with state-of-the-art (SOTA) models. Next, we evaluate the SGAP-Gaze model for Point-of-Gaze (PoG) estimation and compare it’s performance with a benchmark gaze estimation model, GazePTR, followed by a discussion on the failure cases and limitations of the proposed models. 

A. 3D Gaze Direction Estimation 

3D gaze direction estimation aims to predict the orientation of the driver’s gaze vector in three-dimensional space. To es-timate 3D gaze direction in this study, we used the benchmark LBW dataset, which contains 3D gaze ground-truth vectors. A subject-independent evaluation protocol is adopted to evaluate the generalization capability of our proposed model. The dataset is split at the driver level to ensure that training, validation, and test samples come from different individuals. The data from the first 17 drivers are used for training, the next 5 for validation, and the remaining 6 for testing. This setup ensures that the model is evaluated on previously unseen drivers, providing a realistic assessment of its performance in real-world scenarios. Table II shows the performance of our proposed 3D gaze direction estimation model along with other SOTA models, tested on the benchmark LBW dataset. The dataset setup is similar to that used by Kasahara et al. [14], which helps in fair comparison with existing state-of-the-art methods. This includes testing our proposed model with only the driver’s face image as input, without scene information, as shown in Table II. Early methods such as Gaze360 and ETH-XGaze report mean angular error (MAE) of 20.3° and 15.6°, respectively. More recent transformer-based approaches have significantly improved performance, with GazePTR achieving 6.18° mean angular error. The LBW method reports a slightly higher error of 6.70°. Our proposed method achieves a MAE of 6.04°, thereby improving on the existing benchmark model performance.                 

> TABLE II: Results of 3D gaze direction estimation with state-of-the-art models.
> Model Gaze360 ETH-XGaze GazePTR LBW Proposed Input FFFFFMAE 20.3 15.6 6.18 6.70 6.04 8

B. Point of Gaze Estimation 

Although 3D gaze direction estimation provides information about the driver’s gaze orientation in space, it only indicates the direction of gaze. It does not identify the exact location in the scene being observed. Point-of-Gaze (PoG) estimation addresses this limitation by projecting the gaze onto the scene image to determine the precise spatial location, where the driver is looking. This enables a more accurate understand-ing of driver attention within the driving environment. Our proposed model is evaluated primarily on our benchmark UD-FSG dataset. This is because our UD-FSG dataset con-tains more complex and challenging traffic scenarios than the LBW dataset and is better suited for developing a scene-grid attention-based PoG prediction model. However, to further assess the generalization ability of our PoG model, we also evaluate its performance on the benchmark LBW dataset for comparison. 

1) Overall Performance: In this study, the proposed Point-of-Gaze (PoG) estimation model SGAP-Gaze is evaluated using our UD-FSG dataset. The driver-independent evaluation protocol is followed for training, validation, and testing the proposed model, which is similar to the training protocol used for 3D gaze direction estimation, as discussed earlier. The model achieved an overall mean pixel error of 104.73 on the test data, which is approximately 7.13% of the diagonal size of the scene image ( 1280 × 720 pixels). Please note that all results from Point-of-Gaze estimation experiments on the UD-FSG dataset are based on input from facial features (including face, eye, and iris) and scene features. To further analyse the performance of our proposed model, several experiments have been conducted to determine the contribution of different input modalities: face features (F), face and eye features (F+E), and face, eye, and scene features (F+E+S). It can be seen that a mean pixel error (MPE) of 108.63 pixels with a standard deviation (SD) of 92.58 pixels is obtained using only facial features. When iris weighted eye features are incorporated with face features, the MPE de-creases to 105.47 pixels, and the SD further decreases to 84.87, suggesting that eye information provides more reliable gaze cues and improves prediction consistency. Further integrating scene features reduces the MPE to 104.73 pixels and the SD to 81.58, demonstrating that scene context helps the model better localize the point-of-gaze while also improving the stability of the predictions, as reflected in the reduction in SD values. The progressive reduction in both MPE and SD highlights the effectiveness of combining face, eye, and scene information for accurate and consistent PoG estimation. The median pixel error of 80.79 further supports this observation, as it represents the typical performance of the model and is notably lower than the mean error. The noticeable gap between the median and mean values suggests that the distribution is influenced by a limited number of high-error outliers, which shift the mean toward larger values and contribute to the high SD. To check the generalization capability of the proposed SGAP-Gaze model across different traffic environments, it is further evaluated by training and testing on the LBW dataset. And the overall performance of the propose model on LBW and UD-FSG datasets are summarized in Table III. On the LBW dataset, the model achieves a mean pixel error of 63.48 pixels, corresponding to a normalized error of 5.89%. Similarly on the UD-FSG dataset, the model obtains a mean pixel error of 104.73 pixels with a normalized error of 7.13%. Here, the normalized error is compute by dividing the mean pixel error with diagonal (pixels) of the scene image as shown in Table III. The normalized error results shows that the model performance is slightly better on LBW dataset as compared to UD-FSG. However the higher pixel error observed on the UD-FSG dataset can be attributed to its higher image resolution and higher scene complexity, which introduce greater spatial variability in gaze targets. Despite these challenges, the overall normalized error remains relatively low, across both datasets, demonstrating the robustness of the proposed SGAP-Gaze in estimating the driver’s Point-of-Gaze across different datasets and scene conditions.              

> TABLE III: Overall performance of SGAP-Gaze Model.
> Dataset Resolution Diagonal MPE Normalized Error (%) LBW 942 ×489 1061 63.48 5.89 UD-FSG 1280 ×720 1468 104.73 7.13

2) Comparative Analysis of SGAP-Gaze with GazePTR Model: The performance of our proposed 3D gaze direction estimation model with other SOTA models in 3D gaze direc-tion estimation , as given in Table II, shows that the GazePTR model achieves an error of 6.18 °, which is slightly higher than the performance (6.04 °) of the proposed model. There-fore, we perform further analysis by considering GazePTR as the baseline model for point-of-gaze (PoG) estimation 

and compare it’s performance with our proposed SGAP-Gaze. The corresponding results are presented in Table IV. GazePTR achieves a mean pixel error of 136.96 pixels with a standard deviation (SD) of 95.44 over 12,571 samples. In contrast, the proposed SGAP-Gaze achieves mean pixel error of 104.73 pixels, with a standard deviation of 81.58, on the same dataset. This corresponds to a reduction of 32.23 pixels in mean pixel error, representing an improvement of approximately 23.5% compared to GazePTR. Additionally, the lower SD indicates that SGAP-Gaze produces more stable, consistent gaze predictions than GazePTR. This improvement can be attributed to the proposed scene grid attention mechanism, which effectively integrates facial features (from face, eye, iris) with scene contextual information to better localise the driver point of gaze in the scene. The cumulative accuracy results in Table V demonstrate the superior performance of SGAP-Gaze compared to GazePTR across all pixel error thresholds. SGAP-Gaze achieves signif-icantly higher accuracy at lower error levels, with 25.45% of predictions within 50 pixels, compared to 14.34% for GazePTR. Similarly, 60.12% of SGAP-Gaze predictions fall within 100 pixels, whereas GazePTR achieves only 40.92%, highlighting a substantial improvement PoG estimation. This improvement is particularly important for driver attention analysis, where accurate localization of gaze targets is require.                                                    

> TABLE IV: Performance comparison of SGAP-Gaze with GazePTR
> Method MPE SD Sample Size GazePTR 136.96 95.44 12571 SGAP-Gaze (Ours) 104.73 81.00 12571 9
> TABLE V: Cumulative accuracy at different pixel error thresholds
> Pixel Error GazePTR SGAP-Gaze Count Accuracy (%) Count Accuracy (%)
> <50 1803 14.34 3199 25.45
> <100 5144 40.92 7535 60.12
> <105 5476 43.56 7848 62.60
> <125 6802 54.11 8868 70.61
> <150 8219 65.38 9803 78.74
> <200 10183 81.00 11119 89.19
> <500 12470 99.19 12518 99.62

3) Spatial Pixel Error Distribution Analysis: The perfor-mance of SGAP-Gaze and GazePTR is further analyses across different spatial location in the scene image. First the scene image (1280 × 720) is horizontally divided into seven equal regions based on the x-coordinate of the gaze ground-truth to analyze the spatial behavior of the models. The MPE is computed for each region for both GazePTR and SGAP-Gaze, as present in Table VI. The results show that SGAP-Gaze consistently achieves lower MPE across all spatial regions compared to GazePTR. In the outer regions of the scene (0–183 and 1098–1280), where gaze targets are located near the scene boundaries, SGAP-Gaze shows lower MPE (330.48 and 348.05 respectively) compared to GazePTR (447.7 and 444.29). However, performance in these outer regions still requires improvement, as the errors remain significantly higher than those observed in the central regions. In the central regions of the image (366–915), where most gaze samples are concentrated, SGAP-Gaze still achieves consistently lower errors than GazePTR, demonstrating improved accuracy and stability in gaze localization. The lower error in the central region for both models is mainly due to the higher density of PoG, as drivers predominantly look forward.                                                   

> TABLE VI: Comparison of spatial pixel error distribution.
> Range GazePTR SGAP-Gaze Count %MPE SD MPE SD 0–183 447.70 137.55 330.48 186.05 60 0.47 183–366 261.27 110.10 252.89 179.19 203 1.59 366–549 155.38 71.64 133.37 79.89 908 7.12 549–732 104.11 68.12 89.23 63.56 8458 66.33 732–915 181.39 88.42 112.06 71.88 2574 20.18 915–1098 251.27 130.99 200.06 110.12 317 2.48 1098–1280 444.29 168.90 348.05 154.32 51 3.99

4) Visualization of Predicted and Ground Truth Point-of-Gaze (PoG): The visualization of the predicted PoG and groundtruth PoG along with the corresponding driver face helps to understand the qualitative performance of the model. Fig. 8 shows a few samples of PoG predictions with varying error magnitudes. In top sample, the model achieves high accuracy with a pixel error of 11 pixels, indicating that the predicted gaze location is very close to the ground truth. In contrast, the bottom-right sample shows a larger error of 133 pixels, where the predicted gaze location deviates significantly from the actual gaze point. These higher errors typically occur when the driver looks toward the edges of the scene. In comparison, lower errors are commonly observed in the central region of the scene, where drivers predominantly focus while driving. This observation is also supported by the quantitative results in Table VI. These results indicate that the proposed model achieves reliable gaze localization in most cases, while larger errors mainly occur for gaze targets located near the scene boundaries.  

> Fig. 8: SGAP-Gaze results on test samples. The green and red circle (radius = 20 pixels) represent the ground-truth and predicted PoG.

Failure Cases: The MPE of SGAP-Gaze evaluated on 12,571 face–scene image pairs from unseen drivers is 104.73 pixels. As shown in Table V, approximately 62.60% of the predictions fall within the MPE, and about 90% of the test samples have errors below 200 pixels, while only around 10% of the cases exhibit errors greater than 200 pixels. Several factors contribute to these failure cases where the predicted PoG deviates significantly from the ground truth. One common reason for errors greater than 200 pixels is the difficulty in accurately detecting the driver’s iris, particularly when the face image quality is degraded due to motion blur, low illumination, or reflections from sunlight on the eye-tracker glasses. In such situations, the model relies primarily on head orientation cues, while the eye-based gaze information becomes unreliable or unavailable. V. C ONCLUSION 

This study developed a Point-of-Gaze (PoG)-based driver gaze estimation framework. To support this framework, we introduce a large-scale, rear world UD-FSG dataset collected in a heterogeneous traffic environment. The dataset comprises of synchronized driver face images, scene images, and cor-responding 2D gaze ground truth, enabling comprehensive evaluation under realistic driving scenarios. We proposed a scene-grid attention-based point-of-gaze (SGAP-Gaze) network that computes attention between the gaze intent vector and scene information using a Transformer-based mechanism. Since the driver’s face image in the UD-FSG dataset includes surrounding context, a YOLOv8-based Face-Eye-Iris (FEI) detector is trained. The FEI detector is used to detect driver face, eye, and iris from the driver face image captured using the dashboard webcam face camera. The detected face, eyes, and iris are then processed using ResNet-18 model to extract multi-layer facial features, along with iris-weighted eye features of Layer-4 to capture fine-grained eye movements. These features are then fused to form a gaze intent vector, which serves as the query for attention computation. Meanwhile, scene features are extracted from Layer-4 of ResNet-18 model and represented as a 7×7 feature 10 

map, which can be defined as a spatial grid of size 7×7. Then, attention scores are computed between the gaze intent vector and each scene grid to estimate the point of gaze. Besides the PoG based estimation, we also adopted our proposed model for 3D gaze direction using the face information only and compared with existing state-of-the-art models. Our analysis shows that the 3D gaze direction model out-performs all existing benchmark models. We also performed a detailed analysis of the SGAP-Gaze model in terms of PoG estimation. Experimental results show that SGAP-Gaze achieves a mean pixel error (MPE) of 104.73 on the UD-FSG dataset and 63.48 MPE on the LBW dataset, which is 7.13% and 5.19% in the normalized diagonal of the scene image. Compared to the existing state-of-the-art driver gaze estimation model (GazePTR), our proposed model achieves a 23.5% reduction in mean pixel error on the UD-FSG dataset. Further, the spatial pixel distribution analysis shows that SGAP-Gaze consistently achieves lower mean pixel error than GazePTR across all spatial ranges. The improvement is particularly significant in outer regions and near scene bound-aries, indicating better robustness in challenging peripheral scene regions. Despite these promising results, certain limitations of our model can be addressed or expanded upon in the future. In future work, the scene representation can explicitly include regions corresponding to left-wing and right-wing mirrors, which would help to generalize the model further. Addi-tionally, integrating intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters can enhance the model’s scalability across different vehicles, leading to large-scale real-world application. REFERENCES [1] M. A. Regan, C. Hallett, and C. P. Gordon, “Driver distraction and driver inattention: Definition, relationship and taxonomy,” Accident Analysis & Prevention , vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1771–1781, 2011. [2] G. Yuan, Y. Wang, H. Yan, and X. Fu, “Self-calibrated driver gaze estimation via gaze pattern learning,” Knowledge-Based Systems , vol. 235, p. 107630, 2022. [3] Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, “Road accidents in india 2023,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://morth.nic.in/backend/ documents/uploaded/Road-Accident-in-India-2023-Publications.pdf [4] Y. Dong, Z. Hu, K. Uchimura, and N. Murayama, “Driver inattention monitoring system for intelligent vehicles: A review,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 596–614, 2010. [5] G. Li, Y. Wang, F. Zhu, X. Sui, N. Wang, X. Qu, and P. Green, “Drivers’ visual scanning behavior at signalized and unsignalized intersections: A naturalistic driving study in china,” Journal of Safety Research , vol. 71, pp. 219–229, 2019. [6] M. Wu, T. Louw, M. Lahijanian, W. Ruan, X. Huang, N. Merat, and M. Kwiatkowska, “Gaze-based intention anticipation over driving ma-noeuvres in semi-autonomous vehicles,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 6210–6216. [7] C. Mole, J. Pekkanen, W. E. Sheppard, G. Markkula, and R. M. Wilkie, “Drivers use active gaze to monitor waypoints during automated driving,” Scientific Reports , vol. 11, no. 1, p. 263, 2021. [8] A. Koesdwiady, R. Soua, F. Karray, and M. S. Kamel, “Recent trends in driver safety monitoring systems: State of the art and challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 4550–4563, 2016. [9] P.-W. Lin and C.-M. Hsu, “Innovative framework for distracted-driving alert system based on deep learning,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 77 523– 77 536, 2022. [10] E. Michelaraki, C. Katrakazas, S. Kaiser, T. Brijs, and G. Yannis, “Real-time monitoring of driver distraction: State-of-the-art and future insights,” Accident Analysis & Prevention , vol. 192, p. 107241, 2023. [11] P. K. Sharma and P. Chakraborty, “A review of driver gaze estimation and application in gaze behavior understanding,” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , vol. 133, p. 108117, 2024. [12] L. Fridman, P. Langhans, J. Lee, and B. Reimer, “Driver gaze region estimation without use of eye movement,” IEEE Intelligent Systems ,vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 49–56, 2016. [13] S. Jha, M. F. Marzban, T. Hu, M. H. Mahmoud, N. Al-Dhahir, and C. Busso, “The multimodal driver monitoring database: A naturalistic corpus to study driver attention,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 10 736–10 752, 2021. [14] I. Kasahara, S. Stent, and H. S. Park, “Look both ways: Self-supervising driver gaze estimation and road scene saliency,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2022, pp. 126–142. [15] Y. Cheng, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang, H. Hao, Y. Liu, S. Cheng, X. Wang, and H. J. Chang, “What do you see in vehicle? comprehensive vision solution for in-vehicle gaze estimation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 1556–1565. [16] S. Jha, N. Al-Dhahir, and C. Busso, “Driver visual attention estimation using head pose and eye appearance information,” IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 4, pp. 216–231, 2023. [17] D. Hu, X. Li, M. Cui, and K. Huang, “Lnet: Lightweight network for driver attention estimation via scene and gaze consistency,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 35, pp. 27–41, 2025. [18] S. Alletto, A. Palazzi, F. Solera, S. Calderara, and R. Cucchiara, “Dr (eye) ve: a dataset for attention-based tasks with applications to au-tonomous and assisted driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops , 2016, pp. 54– 60. [19] Z. Hu, C. Lv, P. Hang, C. Huang, and Y. Xing, “Data-driven estimation of driver attention using calibration-free eye gaze and scene features,” 

IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 1800– 1808, 2021. [20] S. Lemonnier, L. D´ esir´ e, R. Br´ emond, and T. Baccino, “Drivers’ visual attention: A field study at intersections,” Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour , vol. 69, pp. 206–221, 2020. [21] N. Kaya, J. Girgis, B. Hansma, and B. Donmez, “Hey, watch where you’re going! an on-road study of driver scanning failures towards pedestrians and cyclists,” Accident Analysis & Prevention , vol. 162, p. 106380, 2021. [22] S. Vora, A. Rangesh, and M. M. Trivedi, “Driver gaze zone estimation using convolutional neural networks: A general framework and ablative analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 254–265, 2018. [23] S. Ghosh, A. Dhall, G. Sharma, S. Gupta, and N. Sebe, “Speak2label: Using domain knowledge for creating a large scale driver gaze zone estimation dataset,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2021, pp. 2896–2905. [24] X. Wu, L. Li, G. Zhou, Q. Wu, X. Zuo, H. Zhu, and S. He, “Multi-task driver gaze estimation in real world driving scenes,” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , vol. 160, p. 111892, 2025. [25] K. Diaz-Chito, A. Hern´ andez-Sabat´ e, and A. M. L´ opez, “A reduced feature set for driver head pose estimation,” Applied Soft Computing ,vol. 45, pp. 98–107, 2016. [26] A. Rangesh, B. Zhang, and M. M. Trivedi, “Driver gaze estimation in the real world: Overcoming the eyeglass challenge,” in 2020 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 1054–1059. [27] R. F. Ribeiro and P. D. Costa, “Driver gaze zone dataset with depth data,” in 2019 14th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2019) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5. [28] J. D. Ortega, N. Kose, P. Ca˜ nas, M.-A. Chao, A. Unnervik, M. Nieto, O. Otaegui, and L. Salgado, “Dmd: A large-scale multi-modal driver monitoring dataset for attention and alertness analysis,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2020, pp. 387–405. [29] P. K. Sharma and P. Chakraborty, “Evaluation of data collection and an-notation approaches of driver gaze dataset,” Behavior Research Methods ,vol. 57, no. 6, p. 172, 2025. [30] A. Palazzi, D. Abati, F. Solera, R. Cucchiara et al. , “Predicting the driver’s focus of attention: the dr (eye) ve project,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 1720– 1733, 2018. [31] I. Dua, T. A. John, R. Gupta, and C. Jawahar, “Dgaze: Driver gaze mapping on road,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 5946–5953. [32] L. Yang, K. Dong, A. J. Dmitruk, J. Brighton, and Y. Zhao, “A dual-cameras-based driver gaze mapping system with an application on non-driving activities monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 4318–4327, 2019.