Title: Eye-head coordination during goal-directed orienting in mice

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
Title: Eye -head coordination during goal -directed orienting in mice 

Authors: Brandie Morris Verdone 1, Hui Ho Vanessa Chang 2, Dale C. Roberts 1, Kathleen E. 

Cullen 1, 3, 4 , 5*

1.  Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 720 Rutland Ave , Baltimore, 

MD 21205, USA 

2.  De partment of Physiology, McGill University, 3655 Promenade Sir -William -Osler, Montreal, 

Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada 

3.  Department of Otolaryngology -Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of 

Medicine, 720 Rutland Ave, Baltimore, MD 21205 , USA 

4.  Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720 Rutland Ave, 

Baltimore, MD 21205, USA 

5.  Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles St, 

Baltimore, MD 21218 , USA 

*Corresponding Author , kathleen .cullen@jhu.edu 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ABSTRACT 

In afoveate species such as mice, it is accepted that gaze is typically redirected by head 

movements with a saccade -and -fixate strategy, while the eyes primarily stabilize vision within a 

limited oculomotor range. This view suggests that the accompanying eye movements are 

primarily reflexive, driven by mechanisms like the vestibulo -ocular reflex (VOR). However, 

emerging evidence challenges this assumption, suggesting that eye movements during active 

head motion may not be purely refl ex -driven. Here, we dire ctly test whether eye movements in 

mice are actively coordinated as part of voluntary gaze redirection rather than being reflexive. 

By systematically monitoring head and pupil positions during goal -directed orienting in a cohort 

of male mice , we f ind that mice generated active saccadic eye movements whose onsets are 

tightly linked to head movements. Furthermore, these saccadic eye movements occur at 

markedly shorter latencies than reflexive quick -phase eye movements evoked by comparable 

passive head rotatio ns. Importantly, the interplay between coordinated eye and head movements 

during voluntary orienting resembl e the predictable, stereotyped gaze patterns seen in foveate 

animals, such as primates. Our results suggest that mice possess an evolutionarily conserved 

mechanism for gaze redirection, integrating voluntary eye -head coordination similar to that of 

foveate vertebrates. These findings reframe the prevailing view by demonstrating an actively 

coordinated eye -head component to gaze redirection under goal -directed conditions in mice, 

complementing established reflexive mechanisms. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

INTRODUCTION 

Humans and other foveate species, such as non -human primates, commonly make voluntary 

coordinated eye and head movements to redirect their gaze from one part of the visual field to 

another 1-7. These gaze shifts are characterized by saccades (rapid eye movements that redirect the 

point of visual focus from one target to another) made in tandem with corresponding movements 

of the head and, at times, even the entire body 4-8. Because gaze is determined by the sum of eye 

position relative to the head and head position relative to space, accurate fixation requires the 

precise coordination of head and eye movements. The combination of these orienting movements 

with intermittent periods of gaze stabilization comprises a ubiquitous pattern of voluntary 

movement that is essential for navigating and interacting with the environment 6, 9, 10 ; this has 

been termed a “saccade and fixate” strategy 11 .

In contrast to foveates, most vertebrates lack a fovea —the retinal region of highest visual acuity, 

composed exclusively of cone photoreceptors —and are thus termed afoveates . When exploring 

the environment, afoveates also use a "saccade and fixate" strategy 11 . A prevailing view has been 

that the eye movements made by afoveates when implementing this strategy serve to maintain 

stable gaze rather than actively redirect their gaze to target specific objects 6, 12 . In this view, two 

essential eye movement reflexes that evolved in early vertebrates —the vestibulo -ocular reflex 

(VOR) and optokinetic reflex (OKR) —work synergistically to keep the visual world fixed on the 

retina by moving the eye counter to head motion. Notably, in response to prolonged head motion, 

these reflexes initially produce stabilizing eye movements that counteract head motion ( slow -

phase s), followed by rapid eye movements in the direction of head motion that recenter the eye 

(quick -phase s). As t hese quick -phase s tend to move the average position of the eye in the 

direction of passive head movement ( i.e. beating field) , it has been proposed that they make a 

functional contribution to the orienting response 13, 14 .

Mice are an afoveate vertebrate species widely used as a model in vision research. As afoveates, 

mice are generally considered to use a "saccade and fixate" strategy 15, 16 , where intentional 

scanning head movements induce reflexive eye movements to ensure stable gaze during 

exploration 17 -20 . This proposal aligns with observations that mice, like most vertebrate species, 

generate robust slow and quick -phase VOR and OKR eye movements 21, 22 . While this viewpoint 

has informed the interpretation of recent studies on gaze strategy in the mouse 16, 18, 19, 23 , studies 

have also challenged the notion that the eye movements made during scanning head movements 

are driven exclusively by reflex pathways. For example, the superior colliculus (SC) , which is 

essential for active gaze control 24, 25 , induces eye and head movements in monkeys (foveates) 

and cats (afoveates) when stimulated 8, 26 -30 . Furthermore, recent evidence indicates that 

stimulating the SC in mice also results in significant eye 23 as well as head 31 movements similar 

to those observed in cats and monkeys. Indeed, when mice were observed during free movement, 

conjugate, saccadic horizontal eye movements were seen alongside attempted head movements 18 .

Thus, i t stands to reason that there may exist a common neural strategy for eye -head coordination 

that is conserved across different species, in foveates and afoveates alike. 

Accordingly, here we directly investigated if eye movements in mice comprise a coordinated 

component of voluntary gaze redirection. We took advantage of a well -defined training paradigm 

in which head and pupil position were tracked while mice made active , goal -directed orienting 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

head movements. We found that mice, despite being afoveate, generated active saccadic eye 

movements in coordination with these orienting head movements. Notably, we established that 

these active , saccadic eye movements are directed in the same direction as the active head 

movement and occur at markedly shorter latencies than the reflexive , quick -phase eye 

movements evoked by comparable passive head rotations. The onset of these saccadic 

movements was tightly linked to that of head motion, with a significant proportion preceding 

head motion onset. Furthermore, the interplay between eye and head movements during active 

orientation in mice mirrored the patterns seen in primates, maintaining certain predictable 

relationships; for example, eye movements initiated with the eye more contralateral in the o rbit 

were accompanied by smaller head movements. Taken together, our findings suggest the 

presence of conserved features in the generation of voluntary eye -head gaze shifts across diverse 

species, supporting the not ion of a shared evolutionary mechanism for gaze redirection. 

RESULTS 

Establ ish ing an active orienting paradigm in mice 

To understand the coordination of eye and head motion during active orienting movements, mice 

were trained to perform a reward -based behavioral assessment similar to a task used in prior 

studies of cat gaze shifts 32 -34 . Nine male mice were body -restrained in a tube and attached via 

their headposts to a custom interface that allowed them to move their heads freely in the 

horizontal (yaw) plane , similar to devices used in non -human primate studies 4, 7, 35 . A high 

precision potentiometer was used to measure angular head position (Figure 1A) , and a custom 

lightweight head -mounted camera system was positioned in front of the eye to track the pupil 

using video oculography (VOG) software (Figure 1A, C) . To evoke active orienting head 

movements of different sizes, the waterspouts were positioned at ±10° from center for small, 

±25° for intermediate, and ±40° for large head movements (Figure 1B) . Upon the onset of a 

randomized tone, the mouse moved its head to a spout to receive a water reward. When the tone 

repeated, the mouse was then required to redirect its head to the opposit e spout for a reward, as 

no reward would be given for incomplete movement ( e.g., pausing in -between spouts at the onset 

of a tone or failure to move their head to the opposing spout ). This reward paradigm, combined 

with head and eye position tracking, allowed for the assessment of the natural coupling between 

eye and head movements as mice engaged in goal -directed behavior, as would more typically 

occur during orienting tasks in natural settings. In addition to this active orienting paradigm, we 

also manually applied an external torque to each mouse’s head that passively rotated it between 

the same small, intermediate, and large angular distances in a separate paradigm (Figure 1A) .

Together, comparison across these paradigms allowed for a direct assessment of differences in 

eye and head coordination during active orienting versus passive head movements. 

Characteristics of eye and head coordination during active orienting 

Following successful training (see Methods , Supplementary Figure 1 ), mice performed the 

active paradigm with simultaneous head and eye position tracking for assessment of their 

dynamics and respective contributions to gaze. We determined the onset of head, eye, and 

overall gaze movement by computing the time at which the respective velocities reached a 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

threshold of 25 degrees per second in the direction (temporal or nasal) of the orienting 

movement .

If, during active exploration, mice generated orienting head movements that elicited 

compensatory eye movements to stabilize gaze, then the onset of head motion would be expected 

to precede gaze onset (“ Head -Initiated ”). This occurs because the compensatory slow phase of 

the vestibulo -ocular reflex (VOR) initially drives the eyes in the opposite direction to the 

orienting head movement. As a result, gaze redirection is delayed until the quick phase of the 

VOR generates a rapid eye movement in the same direc tion as the head. Consistent with this 

expectation, such “ head -initiated ” movements were observed across all tested amplitudes, where 

the eye rapidly followed the head once gaze redirection began ( Figure 2A –C). 

Unexpectedly, however, we also commonly observed orienting movements in which gaze onset 

either preceded or coincided with head motion (“Eye –Head Co -Initiated”; see Methods). In these 

cases, a distinct rapid eye movement in the direction of the orienting m ovement occurred just 

before or nearly simultaneously with head motion onset. Because such movements reach onset 

threshold before head motion, they cannot be driven by stabilizing reflexes, which depend on 

vestibular input to counteract head movement. This close temporal coupling between eye and 

head onset therefore suggests a coordinated motor strategy, in which gaze onset was initiated by 

a rapid eye movement in the same direction as the head ( Figure 2D –F). 

Overall, our analysis revealed that while active orienting was generally initiated by head 

movements, eye -head co -initiated gaze redirections were likewise observed across all angular 

distances (Figure 2A -C) . Across head -initiated orienting movements, head motion onset 

preceded gaze onset by an average of 49.2 ± 29.9 m illiseconds for small (Figure 2G, blue 

arrow) , 49.3 ±30.8 milliseconds for intermediate (Figure 2H, blue arrow) , and 

39.3 ±29.5 milliseconds for large orienting movements (Figure 2I, blue arrow) . This pattern is 

consistent with an initial recruitment of the compensatory slow -phase of VOR, during which the 

eye initially moves opposite the head, preventing gaze from reaching threshold. In contrast, for 

the subset of orienting movements co -initiated by eye and head , eye and gaze onset were tightly 

linked with an average interval of 0.0 ±0.0 milliseconds, 0.1 ±1.1 milliseconds, and 0. 3±2.2 

milliseconds for small, intermediate, and large orienting movements, respectively (Figure 2G -I, 

magenta arrows) . Although there was a propensity for head motion onset to precede gaze , eye -

head co -initia ted gaze redirections were routinely observed across movement amplitude ( 33.2 %, 

23.7 % and 38.9 %, respectively; Figure 2G -I, insets) . In addition, the head -initiated distributions 

in Figure 2G -I were significantly bimodal across small, intermediate, and large amplitudes 

(Hartigan’s dip test, p < 0.0005) . This bimodality suggest s the presence of at least two temporal 

strategies in the timing of head -initiated gaze redirections —one characterized by a shorter head 

lead and another by a longer head lead —consistent with differential VOR engagement near gaze 

onset in head -initiated trials. 

We next tested whether our findings might be influenced by mice attempting to move their head s

via enbloc movements of their head -neck ensemble rather than movements of the head itself 

about the cervical column . To address this possibility, we conducted an experiment where we 

further restricted the lumbar region of the mouse’s body during our active behavior paradigm. 

This comparative condition (see Method Detail s: Active and Passive Behavioral Paradigms) 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ensured that head movement occurred with reduced rotation about the back of the body. 

Interestingly, in this more restricted condition, we observed an even larger percentage of eye -

head co -initiated gaze redirections for small and intermediate gaze shifts (53.7% and 39.3% 

respectively) (Supplementary Figure 2 ). The percent occurrence of eye -head co -initiated gaze 

redirections during large orienting movements was comparable to the original testing condition 

(29.6%). Together, this suggests that reducing lumbar contribution to attempted head movements 

results in increased or comparable gaze redirections co -initiated by eye -head movement .

As our setup was specifically designed to restrict orienting movements to the horizontal (yaw) 

axis, we wanted to confirm that this restriction did not affect the relative timing of rapid eye 

movements to orienting head movements . Thus, we conducted an additional experiment in which 

head motion was tracked using a miniaturized lightweight inertial measurement unit (IMU) with 

the head restriction removed (‘Head -Free’, see Methods: Active and Passive Behavioral 

Paradigms) . We first confirmed that the addition of an IMU when performing the initial, yaw -

restricted, paradigm did not alter the distribution of head -initiated versus eye -head co -initiated 

gaze shifts (Figure 2G; Supplementary Figure 3 A; χ²= .0245 , dof=1, p=0. 876 ). We then 

assessed performance in the head -free condition and again found that the relative proportion of 

head -initiated versus eye -head co -initiated orienting movements was consistent with that 

observed in the yaw -restricted paradigm. Notably, 31.2% of unrestricted orienting movements 

were eye -head co -initiated (Supplementary Figure 3B) , comparable to the 34.6% observed 

during yaw -restricted orienting (Supplementary Figure 3A ; χ²= 0.169 , dof=1, p=0. 681 ).

Together, these results demonstrate that active orienting head movements are closely 

synchronized with the onset of rapid eye movements in the same direction , facilitating gaze 

redirection. Interestingly, the mean eye velocity was higher in the head -free condition than in the 

yaw -restricted condition ( Supplementary Fig ure 3D ), despite comparable mean head velocities 

across conditions ( Supplementary Fig ure 3C ), suggesting that faster eye movements are 

employed when the head is unconstrained. 

Eye and head contributions to active orienting 

To better understand the head -eye gaze coordination outlined in Figure 2 , we next visualized the 

head, eye, and gaze redirection generated during active orienting in terms of velocity rather than 

position. Figure 3 highlights the trajectories of head (blue), eye (magenta), and gaze (yellow) 

over a series of orienting movements ranging from small to large made by a mouse during our 

paradigm. As seen across all mice in the study (Supplementary Figure 4), relatively stereotyped 

head, eye, and gaze trajectorie s were observed when aligned to gaze onset (Figure 3A ,

Supplementary Figure 4A ). Overall, we found that specific head -eye dynamics emerged 

depending on whether an active orienting movement was head -initiated or eye -head co -initiated .

In scenarios where gaze redirection was co -initiated by the eye and head , both the eye and head 

moved ipsilaterally and an initial VOR engagement was absent (Figures 3B, D , Supplementary 

Figure 4D ). Meanwhile, VOR engagement was observed in conditions where a rapid eye 

redirection occurred following an initiating head movement (Figures 3C, E , Supplementary 

Figure 4E ). All active orienting movements terminated with opposing head and eye movements, 

indicative of reflexive compensation to stabilize gaze at the end of a redirection. These patterns 

of eye -head movements were consistent with the latency estimations shown in Figure 2 G -I; an 

increased head lead time suggest s that the eye initially moves in the opposite direction as the 

head, while tight eye -gaze latency suggest s a short period between eye and head movement in 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the same direction. Both strategies (head -initiated and eye -head co -initiated) were observed 

across all mice ( Supplementary Figure 4) , indicating that the presence of eye -head co -initiation 

was not driven by a small subset of subjects. Subtle between -animal differences in eye, head, and 

gaze trajectories were observed across mice ( Supplementary Figure 4A -E). In addition, the 

relative prevalence of these strategies varied significantly across animals ( Supplementary 

Figure 4F ; χ² = 84.09, dof = 8, p < 0.0001). Similar inter -individual differences in head -eye gaze 

coordination have been reported in monkeys performing a comparable orienting task 36 .

Next, we assessed the relative contributions of eye and head to gaze for these active orienting 

movements. Figure 4 A-D illustrates the relationships between head and eye amplitude (range of 

movement) with respect to the amplitude of the overall change in gaze. Movements in both the 

nasal and temporal directions showed a linear relationship that increased from small to 

int ermediate to large active orientations. Both temporally and nasally directed head movements 

showed a statistically significant contribution to gaze as measured in amplitude (Figure 4A, B) 

(Linear Regression, Head Temporal: R 2=0. 63 , p<0.0001; Head Nasal: R 2=0. 59 , p< 0.0001). Eye 

amplitude in both the temporal and nasal directions increased with gaze amplitude in a manner 

that was well described by a n exponential function (Figure 4C, D) (Eye Temporal: R 2=0.38 ,

=21.2 °; Eye Nasal: R 2=0.3 7, =14.5 °). Further, the average horizontal eye amplitude during 

active orientation was 10.6 ± 4.8°, 10 -fold larger than the corresponding vertical eye amplitude 

(0.9 ± 0.9°). Despite the contribution of the eye being statistically significant, the amplitude of 

head movements had a larger contribution to the overall change in gaze, in line with primate 

studies 4, 7 . When stratified by gaze redirection type ( head -initiated versus eye -head co -initiated ,

Supplementary Figure 5 A-D), modest but significant differences in main sequence 

relationships emerged. Specifically, in the temporal direction, head movement amplitude scaled 

more steeply with gaze amplitude during eye -head co -initiated orienting movements (slope = 

1.17, R² = 0.68) than during head -initiated movements (slope = 0.98, R² = 0.5 6; p = 0.01). A 

similar difference was observed for eye movement amplitudes, with eye -head co -initiated 

movements characterized by a smaller exponential constant (  = 22.0°, R² = 0.57) than head -

in itiated movements (  = 25.0°, R² = 0.37; p < 0.0001). 

To characterize eye and head movement kinematics during gaze redirection, we examined how 

peak eye and head velocities scaled with gaze amplitude (Figure 4E -H). Indeed, we found that 

larger amplitude changes in gaze were accomplished via the generation of eye as well as head 

movements with increased velocities. Peak head velocities show ed a linear increase with respect 

to gaze amplitude in both the temporal (Figure 4E) and nasal (Figure 4F) directions (Linear 

Regression, Head Temporal: R 2=0.7 4, p<0.0001; Head Nasal: R 2=0. 61 , p< 0.0001). When 

stratified by gaze redirection type (Supplementary Figure 5E) , this relationship differed 

significantly for temporally directed movements: the slope for eye –head co -initiated orienting 

movements (slope=1 3.4 , R 2=0. 79 ) was higher than that for head -initiated movements 

(slope= 10.5 , R 2=0. 66 , p<0.0001 ). Peak eye velocities were again well described by a n

exponential function (Figure 4G, H) ( Eye Temporal: R 2=0.3 5, =15.3 °; Eye Nasal: R 2=0. 27 ,

=11.5 °). Interestingly, the time constant (τ) of the nasally directed eye movements ( Figure 4H ,

τ = 11.5 °) was shorter than that of the temporally directed eye movements ( Figure 4G , τ = 

15.3 °). This indicates that peak eye velocity rises more rapidly with gaze amplitude for nasal 

movements compared to temporal movements, consistent with prior reports of rapid eye 

movements made in the absence of head movement 37 , as well as head -unrestrained conditions 18 .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Consistent with this, eye -head co -initiated orienting movements exhibited a shorter time constant 

in the nasal direction (=11. 3°) than head -initiated movements ( =1 4.8°) (Supplementary 

Figure 5H ). Overall, the velocities and amplitudes of both head and eye movements demonstrate 

predictable relationships with gaze during this active orienting behavior. 

Influence of initial eye position on head and eye contributions to gaze 

Previous studies of gaze shift dynamics in humans and monkeys have emphasized the role that 

the starting position of the eye -in -orbit plays in head and eye coordination 4, 7, 38 . The eye’s 

contribution to gaze is greater when the initial eye position is contralateral to the direction of the 

intended gaze shift 4, 39 -42 . We predicted that th is pattern of head -eye coordination would also 

exist in mice and found that this was indeed the case. Figure 5 shows the eye and head 

contributions to gaze (eye and head amplitudes) as a function of initial eye position. The h ead 

contribution to gaze increased as the initial eye position shifted towards the direction of the 

orienting movement —that is, the head contribute d more when the eye was already positioned 

towards the intended direction (Figure 5A, B , Supplementary Figure 6A , B ) (Linear 

Regression, Head Temporal —small R 2=0.0 7, p= 0. 0002 , intermediate: R 2=0. 27 , p< 0.0001, large: 

R2=0. 43 , p< 0.0001 ; Head Nasal —small R 2=0. 15 , p <0.0001 ; intermediate: R 2=0. 30 , p<0.0001; 

large: R 2=0. 45 , p<0.0001 ). Accordingly, the contribution of the eye to gaze increased when the 

initial eye position was directed opposite to the direction of the orienting movement (Figure 5C, 

D, Supplementary Figure 6C , D ) (Linear Regression, Eye Temporal —small R 2=0.0 8,

p<0.0001 , intermediate: R 2=0.28, p<0.0001, large: R 2=0.3 8, p<0.0001; Eye Nasal —small 

R2=0.0 5, p= 0.00 32 ; intermediate: R 2=0.1 4, p< 0.0001; large: R 2=0.3 2, p< 0.0001). This finding is 

consistent with work in freely moving mice showing that superior colliculus stimulation -evoked 

saccades are biased by initial eye position, such that saccades are more likely when initiated from 

positions opposite the intended endpoint 43 . Further, in visualizing the head and eye contributions 

to changes in gaze, it was clear that the relative relationships between small, intermediate, and 

large orienting movements were maintained, reminiscent of the relationship between head -eye 

amplitude and gaze depicted in Figure 4 (Supplementary Figure 6, insets) .

Active gaze redirection differs from passive gaze stabilization in mice 

As reviewed above, a prevailing view suggests that mice make orienting head movements that 

induce reflexive eye movements to stabilize gaze . If so, rapid eye movements made during active 

head motion should mirror those made during passive head movement with comparable 

vestibular input . To test this, we directly compared head -eye relationships during voluntary 

orienti ng (Figure 1A, Active ) and passive head motion. Specifically, six mice trained in our 

active paradigm underwent passive head rotation s where the experimenter appl ied an external 

torque to the mouse’s head, rotating it between small (~ ±10°), intermediate (~ ±25°), and large 

(~ ±40°) angular distances (Figure 1A, Passive VOR) .

Figure 6 illustrates examples of the eye movements (magenta) evoked in these two conditions, 

with the corresponding head motion (blue) and gaze (yellow) motion plotted for comparison (See 

also Videos S1 -S4) . As in the active orienting task, vertical eye movements were also relatively 

negligible during passive gaze stabilization (mean passive horizontal eye amplitude=14.0±5.4°, 

compared to 0.7±0.8° for passive vertical eye amplitude). In the passive condition , the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

application of head motion evoked an eye movement of equal and opposite amplitude, consistent 

with the VOR slow -phase . As a result, gaze initially remained stable (Figure 6A, top left) . Then ,

in a majority of cases (approximately 6 0%), this initial compensatory eye movement was 

followed by a subsequent rapid recentering of the eye (i.e., VOR quick -phase ; Figure 6A, 

bottom left) . Importantly, the propensity of quick -phase VOR events increased with the size of 

the head movement, consistent with its role in re centering the eye as it approaches its mechanical 

limits (Supplementary Figure 7). In contrast, in the active condition, the eye movement patterns 

showed a distinct difference, with the onset of eye movement tightly synchronized with that of 

head motion, regardless of whether rapid eye movement was coincident with head motion onset 

(Figure 6A, top right ) or followed voluntary head motion (Figure 6A, bottom right ). The 

resulting difference in head -eye coordination revealed a positive linear relationship for mean 

head versus eye velocity (Figure 6B ; Active R 2=0.0 5, p<0.0001 ), that starkly contrasted the 

inverse linear relationship between these two measures in the passive condition (Figure 6B ;

Passive R 2=0. 32 , p<0.0001 ). This findin g reveals a key distinction in eye dynamics between 

active and passive conditions. Furthermore, we found that active gaze shifts were consistently 

accompanied a by rapid eye redirection ; in contrast, this redirection was entirely absent for 

approximately 40 % of passive movements. We then specifically focused our analysis on the 

change in velocity and peak acceleration of the rapid eye movements themselves and found no 

difference between the active and passive conditions (Figure 6B, Right Insets). This is 

expected, given that both active saccades and reflexive VOR quick -phase s are generated by the 

brainstem saccadic burst generator (reviewed in 44 ). 

To further quantify our observations regarding the timing of rapid eye movements , we computed 

the interval between the onset of the head movement and the rapid eye redirection in both 

conditions and found a significant difference , with eye movements reachin g onset in the same 

direction as the head markedly earlier in the active condition compared to the passive condition. 

This key finding underscores a fundamental difference in the dynamics of eye -head coordination 

across conditions. Specifically, our quantification revealed that for active gaze redirection s co -

initiated by eye and head movement , rapid eye motion reached threshold an average of 12.5 ±

14.7 milliseconds earlier than the head (Figure 6C, magenta) . This finding indicates that eye 

movements are not only often coincident with head movement onset but can also precede head 

motion onset. For active gaze redirections in which the head motion onset preceded that of eye, 

the latency between head and eye onset was 35.2 ± 17. 5 milliseconds ( Figure 6C , blue ). In both 

active redirection scenarios, the eye redirected significantly faster than the 155.7 ± 83.3 

millisecond delay observed before a quick -phase was initiated in the passive condition (Figure 

6C, grey) . Indeed, only about 7 % of active , head -initiated gaze redirections displayed an onset 

interval between head and eye movements that overlapped with those observed in the passive 

condition . In this context, we revisualized the gaze redirection distributions shown in Figure 2G -

I to account for the rapid, “saccadic” redirection of the eye observed, faster than the eye 

movements in the passive conditions (Figure 6D) . Further, more stringent cut -off criteria would 

still classify the majority of rapid eye redirection as “saccadic” in nature (Supplementary 

Figure 8). Together, we identify rapid orienting eye movements in mice that serve to redirect 

gaze in a manner similar to cats (afoveates) and primates (foveates) (Figure 7) .

DISCUSSION 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Our central finding is that the eye and head movements of mice are coordinated in a manner 

similar to foveate species during active orienting. Specifically , w e demonstrate that mice, despite 

being afoveate, generate active saccadic eye movements that are tightly synchronized with active 

orienting head movements. Importantly, these active saccadic eye movements occur at markedly 

shorter latencies than the reflexive quick -phase eye movements evoked by comparable passive 

head rotations. To our knowledge, this is the first study to both directly measure eye versus head 

motion onset during voluntary orienting in mice and compare the relative latencies with those 

evoked by passive head motion. These active saccadic movements were directed in the same 

direction as the active head movement, and their onset was tightly coupled with head motion, 

with a substantial proportion leading head motion onset. Overall, the eye and head movements 

produced during active orienting followed re lationships comparable to those observe d in other 

species, including monkeys and humans. Thus, taken together, our present results suggest that a 

common neural strategy for eye -head coordination is conserved across vertebrate species. 

Saccades generated by mice 

As locomotion across species evolved, changes in anatomy and locomotion strategy posed 

challenges for maintaining stable vision. This is because our eyes are attached to our heads; with 

every head movement, retinal slip would occur, preventing us from maintaining stable images of 

the visual world. As such, species developed the gaze -stabilizing VOR consisting of two parts: i) 

a slow -phase that counteracts head movement to stabilize gaze, and ii) a fast phase that rapidly 

moves the eye at high speeds in the direction of head velocity, preventing any attempt to move 

the eyes beyond the oculomotor range 44, 45 . As is the case for nearly all vertebrate species 16 , mice 

generate robust VOR eye movements that stabilize gaze during both passively applied head 

motion (e.g., horizontal head rotations 46 -48 and head tilts 49 -51 ) as well as during head motion in 

freely moving rodents 16 -20 . With the evolution of the high -acuity fovea, the need for an 

independent eye movement system to focus on specific objects arose in foveate species, leading 

to the development of saccadic eye movements 44, 45 . Accordingly, in foveates, eye movements 

can be divided into two categories: those that stabilize gaze via passive reflexes, and those that 

are voluntary and actively target gaze to a new point of interest. 

During natural behavior, afoveate animals such as mice use a "saccade and fixate” system to 

visually explore their surroundings 6, 11 . However, although the quick eye movements seen in 

mice are often referred to as "saccades" in the literature, one prevailing view has been that they 

are not actively generated to target a new object of interest , as seen in foveates . Instead, these 

rapid eye movements were generally thought to be reflexively driven by active orienting head 

movements that redirect their gaze (e.g., 6, 11, 15, 16 ). In this view, when mice shift their gaze, they 

make an active head movement in the direction of the object. In turn, the resulting vestibular 

stimulation reflexively evokes an oppositely -directed slow -phase VOR eye movement and, in 

some cases, a subsequent VOR quick -phase that rapidly redirects the eye in same direction as 

head motion. Recent studies in mice have demonstrated that, even after accounting for head 

rotations, horizontal eye position can exhibit a strong correlation between both eyes 18 . However, 

it had remain ed unclear whether these correlations result from eye movements resetting 

independently of head movements, as suggested in 52 , or if they are the result of active gaze 

shifts. Here we establish that (i) the onset of these active saccadic movements is closely coupled 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

with head motion, with a substantial proportion leading the onset of head motion, and (ii) these 

active saccadic eye movements occur at significantly shorter latencies than the reflexive quick -

phase eye movements evoked by comparable passive head rotations , demonstrating context -

dependent differences in eye movement generation that have also been reported in other 

vertebrates 53, 54 . Thus , our present findings provide direct evidence that the rapid eye movement s

made by mice during gaze redirection are actively generated .

Our finding that rapid eye movements during active orienting occur at shorter latencies than 

reflexive quick -phases driven by vestibular feedback is interesting to consider in light of prior 

head -restrained studies on mouse eye movements. In particular, head -restrained mice can 

generate rapid eye movements resembling saccades, although whether those movements were 

produced voluntarily remained a question 18, 23, 37, 55 -58 . Importantly, the presence of a head 

restraint in these prior studies inherently eliminated vestibular feedback, demonstrating that mice 

can make rapid eye movements in the absence of vestibular input. Here by studying gaze control 

under more naturalistic conditions, our work goes beyond these prior findings to reveal that rapid 

eye movements during active orienting are tightly coupled to head motion during voluntary 

orienting behaviors, highlighting the role of the eye in actively coordinating gaze. Furth er, our 

results demonstrate that mice readily engage in goal -directed orienting between waterspouts, 

consistent with the broader trend that mice can rapidly learn directional, water -rewarded tasks 

that parallel primate ‘center -out’ frameworks 59 . Given this task structure, we hypothesize that the 

relative proportion of head -initiated versus eye -head co -initiated orienting movements is not 

fixed but instead depends on behavioral context. Specifically, this distribution may shift towards 

a higher prevalence of eye -head co -initiat ed during more exploratory behaviors or in response to 

unexpected stimuli. This prediction is consistent with primate studies showing that head -free 

gaze shifts to sudden or unpredictable targets are typically initiated by a saccade, with task 

demands strongly shaping eye -head coordination strategies 4, 60 -62 .

The coordination of eye and head movements during active orienting 

Many animals use a combination of eye and head movements to rapidly orient their visual focus 

(gaze), which are commonly referred to as gaze shifts. Previous studies in primates and cats have 

shown that a shared eye -head gaze controller drives both eye and head movements to achieve 

accurate gaze redirection 45, 63 . This mechanism generates a dynamic gaze feedback signal to 

drive both the head and eye premotor circuits until gaze lands on the intended target and gaze 

error is nulled 60, 64 -66 . Thus, instead of enforcing a specific eye or head trajectory, it minimizes 

gaze errors 30, 67, 68 , similar to the concept of optimal feedback control (for review, see 69 -71 ). 

While the underlying principles of gaze control apply to humans, rhesus monkeys, and cats, there 

are differences in how each species uses eye and head motion. 

Specifically, these differences are linked to the range of motion of a given species’ eyes, known 

as the oculomotor range (reviewed in 38 ). For example, humans and monkeys have a relatively 

large oculomotor range of about ± 55 degrees, such that they rely more on eye movement to shift 

gaze 38, 72 . In contrast, cats have a more limited oculomotor range of about ± 25 degrees, 

necessitating more head motion for gaze redirection, especially for larger shifts 38 . As a result, 

primates display less stereotyped head motion than cats (reviewed in 64 ) but still must generate 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

head motion for larger gaze shifts 7. Here we present evidence that mice, like cats, monkeys, and 

humans, also generate active eye movements when orienting. Although our orienting behavioral 

paradigm rewarded solely based on head movement, we found that the eyes actively contribute 

to gaze redirection, reinforcing a natural eye -head coupling in mice during everyday orient ation .

Notably, mice have a relatively small oculomotor range of about ± 20 degrees 18, 56, 72 . Yet we 

found that the coordinated eye -head gaze shifts generated by mice follow the same patterns (i.e., 

main -sequence relationships, dependency of head motion on initial eye position in orbit) as those 

observed in primates and cats 4, 7, 32, 73 .

In cats and primates, the SC is known to control active orienting by generating integrated motor 

commands that couple saccadic eye movements with head movements, thereby coordinating 

gaze shifts during voluntary behavior 67 . Consistent with this role , stimulation of the SC in these 

species evokes coordinated eye -head gaze shifts (cats 28, 74, 75 and monkeys 8). We propose that the 

SC may serve a similar role in mice . While early SC stimulation studies in head -unrestrained 

rodents reported orienting movements (mice 31, 76, 77 , rats 78 ), these studies did not focus on eye 

movements. More recent work in head -restrained mice demonstrated a tight temporal association 

between eye movement onset and head torque against the restraint —interpreted as an attempted 

head movement —following SC stimulation 23 . A follow -up study in head -unrestrained mice 

recorded both evoked eye and head motion and found a similarly tight coupling 43 . Although 

these studies did not explicitly report the latency between evoked eye and head motion, both 

report values suggesting delays under 30 milliseconds 23, 43 .

Our present findings extend this literature by providing the first direct evidence that during 

voluntary, goal -directed orienting, freely moving mice generate tightly coordinated eye and head 

movements with similarly short latencies. Importantly, these mov ements follow an active gaze 

redirection strategy in which eye motion onset often reach ed threshold prior to head motion —

indicating that eye movements are not merely reflexive but can actively lead the orienting 

response. This pattern is consistent with pr evious reports that saccades in head -restrained mice 

are generally accompanied by attempted head movements 18, 23 , and that when saccades are 

evoked by sensory stimuli, eye motion can begin before head motion 23 . Thus , taken together ,

these observations support the idea that mice employ conserved visuomotor strategies shared 

with primates and other mammals, where the eye's lower inertia can enable faster initiation to 

reorient gaze while the head with its greater inertia follows. Such strategies likely opti mize 

visual processing in dynamic environments 38 . Although our study does not directly test the role 

of the SC, the behavioral pattern we report is consistent with prior findings from SC stimulation 

studies in mice. Accordingly, we speculate that the SC likely contributes to coordinating eye -

head coupling during natural orienting in mice, as it does in other species. Future work should 

aim to identify the specific circuits and computations through which the mouse SC —and 

potentially other brainstem and cortical structures —coordinate goal -directed and refl exive eye -

head movements in complex environments .

Functional implications of active saccadic eye movement in mice 

Our finding that mice coordinate their eye and head movements during active orient ing in a 

manner similar to that used by foveate species raises the question of why it would be functionally 

advantageous for mice to actively move their eyes. One obvious potential advantage is that it 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

allows mice to target objects of interest more precisely. While humans and monkeys possess a 

foveal specialization in their retina (a small central area with high photoreceptor density for 

optimal visual acuity), cats also have a retinal specialization, al though not a traditional fovea. 

Instead, cats have a slit -shaped visual streak with a relatively higher photoreceptor density 

compared to the surrounding retina 79 -81 . Consequently, it makes sense that cats, like humans and 

monkeys, would generate voluntary eye movements to accurately place their eyes on a target of 

interest. Similarly, while mice lack fovea, their retinal anatomy is also not entirely uniform. The 

cent ral region of the mouse retina has a higher photoreceptor cell density than the periphery, 

albeit not as pronounced as in primates 82, 83 . This non -uniform distribution is further evident 

within the retinal ganglion cell (RGC) layer 84 , thereby enabling mice to sample their frontal 

visual fields more effectively; this correlates with a fovea -like representation within their visual 

cortex 85 . Further, it has been shown that neurons within mouse V1 preferentially respond to gaze 

redirecting rather than compensatory movements 86 . We speculate that, even though mice do not 

have a conventional fovea, the variation in photoreceptor distribution and central retinal anatomy 

allow for strategic, preferential focus on objects within the frontal visual field, as this would be 

evolutionar ily advantageous in both prey and predator scenarios. 

Another, not mutually exclusive, advantage of mice generating active eye movements is that this 

ability could allow them to achieve binocular viewing of a target of interest. Unlike primates 

with front -facing eyes, mice have lateral -facing eyes that provid e a broad field of view for 

detecting potential predators (approximately 280° 6, 15, 16, 23, 24, 87, 88 ). This wide field of view 

comes at the expense of a smaller overlapping binocular field (about 40° versus 135° in 

humans 89 ). Nevertheless, neurons in the mouse visual cortex do encode binocular disparities 90, 91 ,

suggesting that optimizing binocular alignment may have functional benefits (see also 18 ). 

Furthermore, when mice are locating prey within a visual scene, the prey image consistently falls 

within a stabilized portion of the visual field that coincides with the region of minimal optic flow 

within the visual field, thereby resulting in minimal motion -induced image blur 92 . Similar 

stabilization of visual input, supported by coordinated eye -head movements , has also been 

reported in other species , including ferrets 93 . Interestingly, the population of RGCs that makes up 

the retinal population within this region of minimal optic flow (Alpha -ON) are non -uniformly 

distributed and permit enhanced visual sampling within certain retinal regions 84 , as described 

above . Such stabilization would in fact need to be properly integrated with an ability to shift the 

axis of visual gaze to achieve the intended behavior during active prey location. Stereopsis, the 

ability to perceive depth through binocular vision, was originally thought to be exclusive to 

mammals with front -facing eyes, primarily for prey detection 94 . However, it has now been 

observed in various vertebrates and invertebrates, including those with laterally -placed eyes like 

mice, and has been proposed to play a more general role in essential behaviors such as 

navigation, predator avoidance, and prey cap ture 16, 92, 95 . Taken together, our present findings 

support the view that eye movements have a conserved role in active orienting across species, 

including mice. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors are grateful to O. E. L. Brown, M. Green, X. Li, Y. Liu , T. Niebur, O. Stanley, S. 

Somanathan, Y.S. Sun, K.P. Wiboonsaksakul, and O. Zobeiri for their experimental 

contributions, as well as all members of the Cullen Lab for their thoughtful feedback throughout 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the creation of this manuscript. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health 

grants K12 -GM123914 (BMV) and 1U01 -NS111695 (KEC et al.). 

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

BMV, HHVC, and KEC designed the experimental study. BMV and HHVC performed surgical 

procedures. BMV oversaw animal training and husbandry. DCR created and optimized the video 

oculography interface. BMV performed all behavioral acquisitions and analyses. BM V and KEC 

wrote the manuscript with input and approval from all authors. This work was supervised by 

KEC. 

COMPETING INTERESTS 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

FIGURE LEGENDS 

Figure 1: Experimental Design. A . After undergoing headpost and camera mount implantation 

surgery (see Methods), the mouse was body -restricted in a tube and its headpost was connected 

to a potentiometer to measure head position. A small camera was attached to the camera mount 

to capture the mouse’s pupil. In the active paradigm, the mouse voluntarily oriented along the 

horizontal axis between two waterspouts for reward at the sound of a randomized tone. For the 

passive VOR paradigm, the experimenter rotated the mouse’s head. B. Schematic of angular 

distances along the horizontal axis. For active, the mouse oriented its head between waterspouts 

for ± 10°, ± 25°, and ± 40° for small, intermediate, and large angular distances. For passive 

VOR, the experimenter rotated the mouse’s head between ± 10°, ± 25°, and ± 40°. C. 

Representative traces of h ead position (blue) and horizontal pupil position (magenta) during a 

segment of the active orienting task . Black dots correspond to the pupil positions in the still 

fram es . Vertical s cale bar : 20 ° Horizontal scale bar: 0.5 second s. Also see Supplementary Figure 

1.

Figure 2: Position, distribution, and timing of head -initiated vs. eye -head co -initiated 

orienting. A -C. Head -initiated orienting for small, intermediate, and large orienting movements, 

respectively, depicted as position. D-F. Eye -head co -initiated orienting for small, intermediate, 

and large orienting movements, respectively, depicted as position. Yellow = gaze. Magenta =

eye. Blue = head. Vertical tick marks indicate onset and offset of head or eye, respectively. Onset 

and offset cutoffs of 25 °/s. Light yellow window indicates gaze duration. Vertical scale bar: 10°. 

Horizontal scale bar: 50 milliseconds. Dots indicate 90 Hz sampling, with positional traces up -

sampled to 1kHz for visualization. G-I. Distribution (insets) and timing with respect to gaze 

onset of small, intermediate, and large head -initiated and eye -head co -initiated orienting 

movements. Magenta = eye -head co -initiated , Blue = head -initiated . Arrows indicate mean of 

respective signal. G. Small inset: 66.8 % head -initiated versus 3 3.2 % eye -head co -initiated . Mean 

latency head: -49.2 ±29.9 milliseconds. Mean latency eye: 0.0 ± 0.0 milliseconds. Head -initiated 

v. eye -head co -initiated p < 0.0001. N = 362 segments across 9 mice. H. Intermediate inset: 

76.3 % head -initiated versus 23.7 % eye -head co -initiated . Mean latency head: -49.3 ± 30 .8 

milliseconds. Mean latency eye: -0.1 1 ± 1.1 milliseconds. Head -initiated v. eye -head co -initiated 

p < 0.0001. N = 427 segments across 9 mice. I. Large inset: 61.1 % head -initiated versus 38.9 %

eye -head co -initiated . Mean latency head: -39.3 ± 29.5 milliseconds. Mean latency eye: -0.27 ±

2.2 milliseconds. Head -initiated v. eye -head co -initiated p < 0.0001. N = 314 segments across 9

mice. Histogram statistical comparisons performed using the Wilcoxon rank -sum test. Latencies 

shown as mean ± SD. Histogram bin size = 11.1 milliseconds, corresponding to a 90 Hz 

sampling rate, or 1 video frame. Also see Supplementary Figure 2 , Supplementary Figure 3,

Video S1, and Video S2. Bimodal distributions were observed for small, intermediate, and large 

head -initiated gaze redirections (blue, Hartigan’s dip test, p<0.0005). 

Figure 3: Head, eye, and gaze redirection velocities . Orientations as shown in velocity traces 

of all (A) , eye -head co -initiated (B) , and head -initiated (C) orienting movements in a single 

direction from a representative mouse. Eye and head onsets aligned to gaze onset. Yellow =

gaze. Magenta = eye. Blue = head. Individual traces shown as thin lines. Means of respective 

signal as thick line. Grey windows and black box highlight a 20 -millisecond region of interest 

around gaze onset, highlighting VOR engageme nt for head -initiated gaze redirection and the 

absence thereof for eye -head co -initiated gaze redirection (arrows). A-C. Vertical scale bar: 200 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

°/s. Horizontal scale bar: 20 milliseconds. Insets are enlargements of the 20 -millisecond region 

of interest highlighted by the black box. N = 45 segments. Dashed grey line at 0 °/s. Mean of 

eye -head co -initiated (D) and head -initiated (E) traces shown. D, E. Vertical scale bar: 100 °/s. 

Horizontal scale bar: 50 milliseconds. Velocity traces up -sampled to 1 kHz for visualization. 

Vertical dashed line indicates gaze onset. Also see Supplementary Figure 4. 

Figure 4: Head and eye amplitudes and peak velocities with respect to gaze amplitude . A, 

B. Head movement amplitude with respect to gaze amplitude for temporally (A) and nasally (B) 

directed movements. Linear Regression, Head Temporal: R 2 = 0. 63 , p < 0.0001 , slope=1.07 

(95% CI: [1.0, 1.13]), N = 581 segments across 9 mice; Head Nasal: R 2 = 0. 59 , p < 0.0001, 

slope=0.98 (95% CI: [0.92, 1.04]), N = 640 segments across 9 mice. C, D. Eye movement 

amplitude with respect to gaze amplitude for temporally (C) and nasally ( D) directed 

movements. Eye Temporal: R 2 = 0.38,  = 21.2° (95% CI: [17.2, 26.7]), N = 581 segments across 

9 mice; Eye Nasal: R 2 = 0.3 7,  = 14.5° (95% CI: [12.7, 16.6]), N = 638 segments across 9 mice. 

E, F. Peak velocity of head movement with respect to gaze amplitude for temporally (E) and 

nasally (F) directed movements. Linear Regression, Head Temporal: R 2 = 0.7 4, p < 0.0001, slope 

=12.3 (95% CI: [11.8, 12.9]), N = 581 segments across 9 mice; Head Nasal: R 2 = 0. 61 , p <

0.0001 , slope =10.6 (95% CI: [9.98, 11.3]), N = 640 segments across 9 mice. G, H . Peak 

velocity of eye movement with respect to gaze amplitude for temporally (G) and nasally ( H) 

directed movements. Eye Temporal: R 2 = 0.3 5,  = 15.3° (95% CI: [12.9, 18.3]), N = 581 

segments across 9 mice; Eye Nasal: R 2 = 0. 27 ,  = 11.5° (95% CI: [10.0, 13.1]), N = 64 0

segments across 9 mice. Green = small, grey = intermediate, purple = large orienting 

movements. Schematic of temporal and nasal directions for head and eye shown. 

Figure 5: Influence of initial eye position on head and eye contributions to gaze. A, B. 

Contribution of head movement to gaze with respect to initial eye position for temporally (A) 

and nasally (B) directed movements. Linear Regression, Head Temporal —small R 2 = 0.0 7, p =

0. 0002 , slope = -0.20 (95% CI: [ -0.31, -0.1 0]), N = 205 segments across 9 mice; large: R 2 = 0. 43 ,

p < 0.0001, slope = -0.74 (95% CI: [ -0.87, -0. 62 ]), N = 190 segments across 9 mice. Line 

comparisons: F = 43.3 , DFn = 1, DFd = 391 , p < 0.0001; Head Nasal —small R 2 = 0. 15 , p <

0.0001 , slope = 0.30 (95% CI: [0.19, 0.41]), N = 164 segments across 9 mice; large: R 2 = 0. 45 , p 

< 0.0001, slope = 0.74 (95% CI: [0.63, 0.86]), N = 209 segments across 9 mice. Line 

comparisons: F = 29.1 , DFn = 1, DFd = 369, p < 0.0001. C, D. Contribution of eye movement to 

gaze with respect to initial eye position for temporally (C) and nasally (D) directed movements. 

Eye Temporal —small R 2 = 0. 08 , p < 0.0001 , slope = 0.09 (95% CI: 0.04, 0.14]), N = 205 

segments across 9 mice; large: R 2 = 0. 38 , p < 0.0001, slope = 0.33 (95% CI: [0.27, 0.39]), N =

190 segments across 9 mice. Line comparisons: F = 39.6 , DFn = 1, DFd = 391 , p < 0.0001; Eye 

Nasal —small R 2 = 0.0 5, p = 0. 0032 , slope = -0.07 (95% CI: [ -0.10, -0.02]), N = 164 segments 

across 9 mice; large: R 2 = 0. 32 , p < 0.0001, slope = -0.27 (95% CI: [ -0.33, -0.22]), N = 209 

segments across 9 mice. Line comparisons: F = 32.48 , DFn = 1, DFd = 369 , p < 0.0001. Green =

small, purple = large orienting movements. Schematic of temporal and nasal directions for head 

and eye shown. Also see Supplementary Figure 5. 

Figure 6: Passive VOR versus active gaze redirection . A. Representative velocity traces for 

passive gaze stabilization (top left), passive gaze stabilization with a quick -phase of nystagmus 

(bottom left), active, eye -head co -initiated gaze redirection (top right), and active, head -initiated 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

gaze redirection (bottom right). Yellow = gaze. Magenta = eye. Blue = head. Vertical scale bar: 

50 °/s. Horizontal scale bar: 20 milliseconds. Grey windows indicate the interval between head 

motion onset and rapid eye redirection. B. Mean eye velocities with respect to mean head 

velocities during head movement for active gaze shifts (purple) vs. passive gaze stabilization 

(grey). Active: R 2= 0. 05, slope = 0.30 (95% CI: [0.16, 0.43]) , p < 0.0001 , N = 361 segments. 

Passive: R 2 = 0. 32 , slope = -0.43 (95% CI: [ -0.50, -0.37]) , p < 0.0001, N = 363 segments. Line 

comparison: F = 90.64 , DFn = 1, DFd = 720 , p<0.0001. Insets as follows —1: Distribution of 

mean head velocity between the active and passive paradigms , showing matched comparisons .

Active vs. passive p = 0. 8847 , Wilcoxon rank -sum test; 2: Change in velocity from the start to 

the peak of the rapid eye movement during the active paradigm compared to the same measure 

during passive movements with respect to time. Welch’s t test, p = 0.1293 , N = 361 active, 209 

passive segmentations; 3: Peak acceleration of rapid eye movement generated during the active 

paradigm compared to the same measure generated during passive gaze stabilization. Welch’s t 

test, p = 0. 9637 , N = 361 active, 209 passive segmentations. C. Histograms of the interval 

between head movement onset and rapid eye redirection for head velocity –matched active: eye -

head co -initiated (magenta) and active: head -initiated (blue) versus passive (grey) segments. 

Active eye -head co -initiated mean = -12.5 ± 14.7 milliseconds, N = 170 segments. Active head -

initiated mean = 35.2 ± 17.5, N = 19 2 segments. Passive with quick -phase mean = 155.7 ± 83.3 ,

N = 218 segments. Active eye -head co -initiated vs. passive with quick -phase p < 0.0001, 

Wilcoxon rank -sum test. Active head -initiated vs. passive with quick -phase p < 0.0001, 

Wilcoxon rank -sum test. Means of the respective populations indicated with an arrow. In 

addition, data are shown for percentage of passive movements for which no quick -phase were 

generated ( 39.9%, N = 14 5 segments). Histogram bin size = 22.2 milliseconds, corresponding to 

two video frames. D. Replotting of head -initiated versus eye -head co -initiated distributions 

shown in Figure 2 G -I, now identifying head -initiat ed gaze shifts demonstrating a saccadic eye 

movement as defined by data outside of the 6. 5% overlap between active: head -initiated and 

passive. Small: 33.2 % eye -head co -initiated , 62.4 % head -initiated with saccadic eye movement, 

4. 4% remaining head -initiated . Intermediate: 23.7 % eye -head co -initiated , 71.2 % head -initiated 

with saccadic eye movement, 5. 1% remaining head -initiated . Large: 38.9 % eye -head co -

initiated , 57.0 % head -initiated with rapid eye redirection, 4.1 % remaining head -initiated . Also 

see Supplementary Figure 6, Supplementary Figure 7, Videos S1 -S4 .

Figure 7: Comparison of active gaze redirection across species. Representative traces of gaze 

(yellow), head (blue), and eye (magenta) from human, monkey, cat, and mouse. Light yellow 

window indicates gaze duration. Vertical scale bar: 20 °. Horizontal scale bar: 100 milliseconds. 

Human, monkey, and cat traces ada pted with permission from Guitton 1992 38 .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

0˚

-40 ˚ 40 ˚

Small ( ± 10°) Large ( ± 40°) Intermediate ( ± 25°) 

BA

Active Passive VOR 

C

horizontal pupil position head position 

0.5 s 20° Figure 1 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint -160 -120 -80 -40 0Timing re. Gaze Onset (ms) 020 40 60 80 100 Percent Occurrence Total=362 33.2% 66.8% -160 -120 -80 -40 0Timing re. Gaze Onset (ms) 020 40 60 80 100 Percent Occurrence 

Total=314 38.9% 61.1% 

G H ISmall Intermediate Large 

50 ms 10° 

50 ms 10° 

A B CSmall Intermediate Large Active:  Head -Initiated Active:  Eye -Head  Co-Initiated 

50 ms 10° 

Gaze Eye Head 

50 ms 10° 

50 ms 10° 

D E FSmall Intermediate Large 

Eye-Head Co-Initiated Head-Initiated 

50 ms 10° -160 -120 -80 -40 0Timing re. Gaze Onset (ms) 020 40 60 80 100 Percent Occurrence 

Total=427 23.7% 76.3% Figure 2 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint A B CAll Eye -Head Co-Initiated Head -Initiated 

50 ms 100 °/s 

Gaze Eye Head D EEye -Head Co-Initiated Head -Initiated 

20 ms 200 °/s 

Gaze Eye Head Figure 3 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint Small Intermediate Large 

> + _

Nasal (+) Temporal (–) Head Eye 

0 20 40 60 020 40 60 

Gaze Amplitude (°) Head Amplitude (°) 0.59 R 2 =<0.0001 P0 20 40 60 020 40 60 

Gaze Amplitude (°) Eye Amplitude (°) R 2 = 0.37 

=14.5 0 20 40 60 0500 1000 1500 

Gaze Amplitude (°) Peak Head Velocity (°/s) <0.0001 0.61 R 2 =P0 20 40 60 0500 1000 1500 

Gaze Amplitude (°) Peak Eye Velocity (°/s)  0.27 R2 =11.5 =0 20 40 60 020 40 60 

Gaze Amplitude (°) Head Amplitude (°) R 2 =P 0.63 <0.0001 0 20 40 60 020 40 60 

Gaze Amplitude (°) Eye Amplitude (°) R 2 =

= 0.38 21.2 0 20 40 60 0500 1000 1500 

Gaze Amplitude (°) Peak Head Velocity (°/s) R 2 =P 0.74 <0.0001 0 20 40 60 0500 1000 1500 

Gaze Amplitude (°) Peak Eye Velocity (°/s) 0.35 15.3 R 2 =

=Amplitude Peak Velocity 

AC DEBFG H

Nasal Temporal Figure 4 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Small Large 40 60 

-40 -20 0 20 010 20 30 40 50 Initial Eye Position (°) Head  Contribution to Gaze (°) R2=R2=0.07 *** 0.43 **** 

50 60 -40 -20 0 20 40 010 20 30 40 Initial Eye Position (°) Eye  Contribution to Gaze (°) R2=R2=0.08 **** 0.38 **** 

50 60 R2=0.45 **** 

-40 -20 0 20 40 010 20 30 40 Initial Eye Position (°) Head  Contribution to Gaze (°) R2=0.15 **** 

50 60 -40 -20 0 20 40 010 20 30 40 Initial Eye Position (°) Eye  Contribution to Gaze (°) R2=R2=0.32 **** 0.05 ** 

Nasal Temporal Nasal Temporal AC DB

> + _

Nasal (+) Temporal (–) Head Eye Figure 5 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint Active 

Passive 

Eye-Head Co-Initiated Head-Initiated, Saccadic Eye Movement Head-Initiated Small Total=362 33.2% 62.4% 4.4% Intermediate Total=427 23.7% 71.2% 5.1% Large Total=314 38.9% 57.0% 4.1% 50 400 Mean Head Vel (°/s) 030 % Occurrence Active Passive 

p=n.s. 

AC DB

0 100 200 300 400 -400 -200 0200 400 600 

Mean Head Velocity (°/s) Mean Eye Velocity (°/s) 

> ****

Gaze Eye Head 

Active: Eye-Head Co-Initiated Passive Active: Head-Initiated Passive with Quick-Phase 50 °/s 20 ms 0200 400 No Quick-Phase Interval Between Head Onset & Rapid Eye Redirection (ms) 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Percent Occurrence Active: Head-Initiated Active: Eye-Head Co-Initiated Passive 

020 40 60 80 100 

> Velocity Eye

ns Active Passive w/ Quick-Phase 060000 ns Active Passive w/ Quick-Phase Peak Eye Acceleration (°/s 2)B.1 B.2 B.3 Figure 6 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint Human Monkey Cat 

100 ms 20° 

100 ms 20° Mouse 

Gaze Eye Head Foveates Afoveates 

> 20°

100 ms 

> 20°

100 ms Figure 7 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint MATERIALS & METHODS 

Experimental Model and Subject Details 

Nine adult (8 months old) male C57 BL/ 6J mice ( The Jackson Laborator y) were used in this 

study. All animals used in this study were bred and maintained on site . Mice were housed in 

standard cages in a temperature and humidity -controlled animal facility on a traditional 4.5% fat 

diet ad libitum . Animals had ad libitum access to water (approximately 500 m L) when not 

engaged in the active training paradigm (see Method Details : Active and Passive Behavioral 

Paradigms ). Animals used in this study were individually housed post -surgery (see Method 

Details : Headpost and Camera Mount Implantation ). Animals were on a 12:12 h light: dark cycle 

and tested during the light phase. All animal husbandry and procedures were carried out with 

ethical approval and oversight from the Animal Care and Use Committee at Johns Hopkins 

University , National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals , and 

in accordance with ARRIVE Guidelines 96 . We have complied with all relevant ethical 

regulations for animal use. 

Headpost and Camera Mount Implantation 

Mice were anesthetized via isoflurane inhalation (1.5 -2.5% isoflurane in O 2) and secured in a 

stereotaxic surgical frame. A midline incision was performed to secure the skull, followed by the 

addition of topical bupivacaine for pain management. A thin layer of dental adhesive (Kerr ,

314614 ) was applied to the skull , followed by the placement of a custom -built headpost over 

bregma. The camera mount was a 4x4 receptacle connector (approximately 3x3 mm) placed 

immediately anterior to the headpost on the surface of the skull and secured with dental acrylic .

Skin was re -adhered around the implant with Vetb ond (3M, 014006 ) and topical analgesics and 

antibiotic s was administered at the incision borders. Animals were monitored for a minimum of 

24 hours post -op before any experimentation. 

Active and Passive Behavioral Paradigms 

For the active paradigm, mice were restricted from receiving water for 48 hours prior to the first 

day of training. Mice remained water -restricted throughout the study with the exception of 

waterspout reward delivery and 100 mg of H 2O gel following a training session (details in the 

forthcoming paragraphs). 

Animals were placed in a custom -printed tube at the center of a turntable. Headposts attached to 

the mice were connected to custom -printed arms attached to a low friction potentiometer that 

measure d the change in horizontal head position as a measure of voltage change. Mice were 

allowed to settle into a comfortable resting head pitch prior to fix ation to the potentiometer .

Movement was largely restricted to the horizontal (yaw) axis , comparable to the devi ces used in 

prior studies of primate gaze shifts (e.g., 4, 7, 35 ).

Two waterspouts were placed at approximately ± 10°, ± 25°, or ± 40° from center to evoke 

different sized orienting movements. The order of spout distance was randomized between mice 

and session. Head position was monitored in real time using a QNX -based data acquisition 

system (REX) and SpikeGLX (Janelia) (Schematic: Supplementary Figure 1A). Animals were 

trained to move their head from spout A directly to spout B at the sound of a randomized tone 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(50 ms, 80 dB, 4.1 kHz , interval range =2.5 -7 seconds ) ( and vice versa , spout B to A) at 

increasingly spaced distances to receive a water reward. No reward was given for incomplete 

movement s; for example, pausing between the spouts or failure to move within the reward 

window set around tone onset . Spout position corresponded to a 10 ° reward window, in which a

reward of approximately 40 μL H 2O was delivered once the mouse ’s head entered the positional 

window (Supplementary Figure 1A). For the purposes of this study, success/failure was 

defined by heading towards the reward (ie . the head entering the reward window) and not 

necessarily consumption of the reward, though H2O consumption was confirmed by the 

experimenter at multiple points throughout the training session by assessing the presence or 

absence of water accumulation .

Training began 2 weeks prior to acquisition , consisting of daily 1-hour training sessions to 

acclimate the mo use to tone and water delivery. Study acquisitions consisted of three 10 -minute 

trials with a 3 -minute inter -trial interval . The timing criterion for successful completion of the 

task was purposely relaxed to minimize the risk of repetitive movement patterns, thus 

encouraging more naturalistic behavior while still ensuring that mice were engaged in the active 

orienting task. Mice performed an average of 120 attempted head movements in a 10 -minute 

session. Successful orienting movements were included if (1) the mouse’s head entered the 

reward window, (2) eye movements were successfully tracked for the duration of a head 

movement without interruption ( e.g., blinking), and (3) the resulting eye, head, and summated 

gaze signals all reached minimum onset threshold in the intended direction (see Methods: Eye, 

Head, and Gaze Analysis) . Well -trained mice indeed anticipated the tone, bu t no difference 

between strategy (head -initiated vs. eye -head co -initiated ) was observed (Supplementary 

Figure 1C). As such, all completed head movements , regardless of tone anticipation, were 

quantified in this study. For the passive VOR paradigm, no water reward was administered, and 

instead the experimenter used their hand to apply an external torque to the mouse’s head. The 

head was moved back and forth from positions approximating ± 10°, ± 25°, and ± 40° from 

center with position measured by the potentiometer. For both the active and passive behavioral 

paradigms, an opaque surround separated the mouse from the experimenter. 

Eye and head movements were also recorded during two additional active paradigms. First, we 

restricted the mouse’s body to prevent head movement about the lumbar column during our 

active behavioral paradigm (Supplementary Figure 2) . This paradigm allowed us to focus 

exclusively on head movements generated by the head -neck ensemble, isolating them from any 

contributions by body motion. Specifically, mice were body -wrapped about the thoracic and 

lumbar regions of the spine and placed back in the custom -printed tube at the center of the 

turntable (termed additional lumbar restriction) . They then repeated the active paradigm while 

body -restricted , as described above. Second, to confirm that our active setup did not alter the 

timing of eye versus head movements, mice made orienting movements in an additional 

paradigm which allowed completely free head motion (‘Head -Free’) . We tracked their head 

movements using a miniature inertial measurement unit (IMU) attached to the headpost 

(Supplementary Figure 3) , and a body restriction collar was put in place to prevent the mouse 

from exiting the tube during the head -free assessment. In t his second active experiment, mice 

again performed the active paradigm as described above (‘Yaw -Restricted’) with waterspouts 

placed at ± 25° while the IMU captured the angular rate and linear acceleration of the head. Mice 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

then performed the active paradigm in a head -free manner, orienting between the two spouts 

while not attached to the potentiometer. 

Eye and Head Tracking 

To track the position of the pupil, video oculography software (VOG) was used in conjunction 

with a small camera (Arducam, B0066 -02) with a frame rate of 90 FPS placed in front of the 

mouse’s eye. The camera was held in place by a custom 3D printed camera holder connected to 

the mouse headpost. This allowed the camera to move with the head while maintaining fixation 

on the mouse’s eye. VOG was captured onto the Raspberry Pi 4 (RAS -4-4G). The OpenCV 

(https://opencv.org/ ) image processing library was used to threshold the eye image and detect the 

dark pupil via the findContour s function. The centroid of the pupil contour was computed using 

the moments function. This permitted resolution beyond one pixel. The frame -to -frame pupil 

tracking variability was approximately  0.19°. To time -align the acquired pupil position dataset 

with the head position data, a frame sync pulse was delivered from the Raspberry Pi 4 to 

SpikeGLX for post hoc synchronization by aligning each VOG data sample with its 

corresponding sync pulse edge. Oscilloscope visualization confirmed sync signal delivery with a 

variability of 0 -40 μs, below the millisecond estimations used in subsequent analyses. Head yaw 

angle was measured as a voltage from the potentiometer, sampled at 5 kHz into SpikeGLX and 

converted to degrees post hoc . For experiments using an IMU, data was time -aligned using a 

data sync pulse delivered from the IMU to SpikeGLX. Head position was then derived from 

obtained head velocity data and compared in the yaw -restricted versus head -free conditions. 

Both horizonta l head and eye position were imported into Matlab (Mathworks) and head position 

data was down -sampled from 5 kHz to 90 Hz to match the native sampling of eye position for 

subsequent analys is (See Supplementary Figure 1D, E for representative VOG processing 

steps). This permitted positional detection limited to the resolution of the camera’s sampling 

period. 

Eye, Head and Gaze Analysis 

During VOR in light, opposing head and eye movements at 1 -2 Hz yield a gain near unity (e.g., 

> 97, 98

). To calibrate eye positions to degrees, mice underwent ~1 Hz (range: 1.0 -1.6 Hz) sinusoidal 

yaw rotations under light conditions while head -fixed, with angular head velocity recorded using 

a gyroscope. Movements were timed to a metronome cue to minimize inter -trial variability. 

Calibration peak velocities ranged from 54 -75°/s (mean: 62 °/s). The average number of 

movements and subsequent cycles was approximately 34 and 18, respectively (movement 

range=22 -64 movements; cycle range=11 -32 cycles). Gyroscope data were captured in 

SpikeGLX, and pupil positions were recorded with Raspberry Pi VOG, synchronized to 

SpikeGLX ( See Method Details : Eye and Head Tracking). Eye velocity, derived from 

synchronized pupil positional data, was scaled to match head -eye gain to 1, representing degrees -

per -second. 

Down -sampled h ead and native eye position data acquired from both the active and passive 

behavioral paradigms were summed to calculate gaze. Head, eye, and gaze position data was 

then digitally low -pass -filtered (Butterworth, cut -off frequency = 40 Hz ). Identical filtering of 

both the active and passive behavioral data allowed direct comparisons between eye and head 

movement latencies both within and across conditions (see 99, 100 ). All three position signals were 

differentiated to obtain their respective velocities . For each successful trial, the onset s and offset s

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

of head and gaze redirection were determined using a 25°/s threshold criterion used in prior 

studies of primate gaze shifts (e.g., 4, 7 ). Likewise, the onsets and offsets of rapid eye redirection 

made in the direction of head motion were determined using a 25°/s threshold criterion , relative 

to any compensatory slow -phase eye movement . During active gaze redirection, gaze shifts were 

classified as “ Head -Initiated ” when head velocity reach ed its onset threshold before both eye and 

gaze movement. They are classified as “Eye -Head Co -Initiated” when eye and gaze velocity 

reach ed onset threshold at or before the onset of head motion. Metrics of head, gaze, and eye 

position and velocity were then computed within each of these onset and offset windows . For 

passive head movements , the onsets and offsets of head, gaze, and eye movement were 

computed using the same approach. All analys es were performed on the down -sampled head and 

native eye data (90 H z) . Data was resampled to 1 kHz after analysis for visualization. 

Statistic s and Reproducibility 

Statistical analyses were performed using Matlab . Histogram comparisons were performed using 

a two -sided Wilcoxon rank sum test. Means shown as mean ± standard deviation unless 

otherwise indicated . Linear and nonlinear fits were performed in Prism 9 (GraphPad). Simple 

linear regressions used non -zero significance without forcing through origin . Exponential fits 

were computed using GraphPad’s “one phase association” equation: Y = Y0 + (Plateau - Y0) * 

(1 - exp( -K * x). For analyses performed on individual movements, the unit of analysis was a 

single active orienting movement or applied head movement ; for each condition , figure legends 

report both the number of movements (i.e. “ segments ”) analyzed and the number of mice from 

which those movements were obtained (e.g., “N = X segments across Y mice”). All reported 

effects were observed across multiple mice and were reproducible across animals. 

DATA AV AILABILITY 

Requests for further information should be directed to the lead contact, Kathleen Cullen, 

kathleen.cullen@jhu.edu. Data supporting the findings of this study are available in Fig Share 

with the identifier  https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.31686991 . Any additional information 

required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon 

reasonable request. 

CODE AVAILABILITY 

Custom MATLAB scripts were used to generate the figures and is available from the 

corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

References 

1. André -Deshays, C., Berthoz, A. & Revel, M. Eye -head coupling in humans. Experimental 

Brain Research 69 , 399 –406 (1988). 

2. Barnes, G. R. Vestibulo -ocular function during co -ordinated head and eye movements to 

acquire visual targets. J. Physiol. (Lond. ) 287 , 127 –147 (1979). 

3. Bizzi, E., Kalil, R. E. & Tagliasco, V. Eye -Head Coordination in Monkeys: Evidence for 

Centrally Patterned Organization. Science 173 , 452 –454 (1971). 

4. Freedman, E. G. & Sparks, D. L. Eye -Head Coordination During Head -Unrestrained Gaze 

Shifts in Rhesus Monkeys. BMJ 2, 532 (1997). 

5. Goldring, J. E., Dorris, M. C., Corneil, B. D., Ballantyne, P. A. & Munoz, D. P. Combined 

eye -head gaze shifts to visual and auditory targets in humans. Experimental brain research 111 ,

68 –78 (1996). 

6. Land, M. F. The Evolution of Gaze Shifting Eye Movements. Current Topics in Behavioral 

Neurosciences 41 , 3 –11 (2019). 

7. McCluskey, M. K. & Cullen, K. E. Eye, Head, and Body Coordination During Large Gaze 

Shifts in Rhesus Monkeys: Movement Kinematics and the Influence of Posture. Journal of 

Neurophysiology 97 , 2976 –2991 (2007). 

8. Freedman, E. G., Stanford, T. R. & Sparks, D. L. Combined eye -head gaze shifts produced by 

electrical stimulation of the superior colliculus in rhesus monkeys. Journal of neurophysiology 

76 , 927 –952 (1996). 

9. Bizzi, E., Kalil, R. E. & Morasso, P. Two modes of active eye -head coordination in monkeys. 

Brain Res. 40 , 45 –48 (1972). 

10. Zangemeister, W. H. & Stark, L. Gaze latency: Variable interactions of head and eye latency. 

Exp. Neurol. 75 , 389 –406 (1982). 

11. Land, M. F. Motion and vision: why animals move their eyes. Journal of Comparative 

Physiology 185 , 341 –352 (1999). 

12. Walls, G. L. The evolutionary history of eye movements. Vision Research 2, 69 (1962). 

13. Vidal, P. P., Roucoux, A. & Berthoz, A. Horizontal eye position -related activity in neck 

muscles of the alert cat. Exp. Brain Res. 46 , 448 –453 (1982). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14. Chun, K. S. & Robinson, D. A. A model of quick phase generation in the vestibuloocular 

reflex. Biol. Cybern. 28 , 209 –221 (1978). 

15. Land, M. F. & Nilsson, D. in Animal Eyes (Oxford University Press, 2012). 

16. Michaiel, A. M., Abe, E. T. & Niell, C. M. Dynamics of gaze control during prey capture in 

freely moving mice. eLife 9 (2020). 

17. Meyer, A. F., Poort, J., O’Keefe, J., Sahani, M. & Linden, J. F. A Head -Mounted Camera 

System Integrates Detailed Behavioral Monitoring with Multichannel Electrophysiology in 

Freely Moving Mice. Neuron 100 , 46 –60.e7 (2018). 

18. Meyer, A. F., O’keefe, J. & Poort, J. Two Distinct Types of Eye -Head Coupling in Freely 

Moving Mice. Current Biology 30 , 2116 (2020). 

19. Payne, H. L. & Raymond, J. L. Magnetic eye tracking in mice. eLife 6, e29222 (2017). 

20. Wallace, D. J. et al . Rats maintain an overhead binocular field at the expense of constant 

fusion. Nature 498 , 65 –69 (2013). 

21. Straka, H., Zwergal, A. & Cullen, K. E. Vestibular animal models: contributions to 

understanding physiology and disease. J. Neurol. 263 , 10 –23 (2016). 

22. Carcaud, J. et al . Long -Lasting Visuo -Vestibular Mismatch in Freely -Behaving Mice 

Reduces the Vestibulo -Ocular Reflex and Leads to Neural Changes in the Direct Vestibular 

Pathway. eNeuro 4, ENEURO.0290 –Feb (2017). 

23. Zahler, S. H., Taylor, D. E., Wong, J. Y., Adams, J. M. & Feinberg, E. H. Superior colliculus 

drives stimulus -evoked directionally biased saccades and attempted head movements in head -

fixed mice. eLife 10 (2021). 

24. May, P. J. The mammalian superior colliculus: laminar structure and connections. Prog. 

Brain Res. 151 , 321 –378 (2006). 

25. Sparks, D. L. The brainstem control of saccadic eye movements. Nature Reviews 

Neuroscience 3, 952 –964 (2002). 

26. Choi, W. Y. & Guitton, D. Responses of Collicular Fixation Neurons to Gaze Shift 

Perturbations in Head -Unrestrained Monkey Reveal Gaze Feedback Control. Neuron 50 , 491 –

505 (2006). 

27. Matsuo, S., Bergeron, A. & Guitton, D. Evidence for gaze feedback to the cat superior 

colliculus: discharges reflect gaze trajectory perturbations. J. Neurosci. 24 , 2760 –2773 (2004). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28. Paré, M., Crommelinck, M. & Guitton, D. Gaze shifts evoked by stimulation of the superior 

colliculus in the head -free cat conform to the motor map but also depend on stimulus strength 

and fixation activity. Experimental Brain Research 101 , 123 –139 (1994). 

29. Smalianchuk, I., Jagadisan, U. K. & Gandhi, N. J. Instantaneous Midbrain Control of 

Saccade Velocity. J. Neurosci. 38 , 10156 –10167 (2018). 

30. Klier, E. M., Wang, H. & Crawford, J. D. The superior colliculus encodes gaze commands in 

retinal coordinates. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 627 –632 (2001). 

31. Masullo, L. et al . Genetically Defined Functional Modules for Spatial Orienting in the Mouse 

Superior Colliculus. Current Biology 29 , 2892 –2904.e8 (2019). 

32. Guitton, D., Douglas, R. M. & Volle, M. Eye -head coordination in cats. Journal of 

neurophysiology 52 , 1030 –1050 (1984). 

33. Blakemore, C. & Donaghy, M. Co -ordination of head and eyes in the gaze changing 

behaviour of cats. J. Physiol. (Lond. ) 300 , 317 –335 (1980). 

34. Guitton, D., Munoz, D. P. & Galiana, H. L. Gaze control in the cat: studies and modeling of 

the coupling between orienting eye and head movements in different behavioral tasks. Journal of 

neurophysiology 64 , 509 –531 (1990). 

35. Fuchs, A. F., Ling, L. & Phillips, J. O. Behavior of the position vestibular pause (PVP) 

interneurons of the vestibuloocular reflex during head -free gaze shifts in the monkey. J. 

Neurophysiol. 94 , 4481 –4490 (2005). 

36. Cullen, K. E., Huterer, M., Braidwood, D. A. & Sylvestre, P. A. Time course of 

vestibuloocular reflex suppression during gaze shifts. J. Neurophysiol. 92 , 3408 –3422 (2004). 

37. Itokazu, T. et al . Streamlined sensory motor communication through cortical reciprocal 

connectivity in a visually guided eye movement task. Nat. Commun. 9, 338 –4 (2018). 

38. Guitton, D. Control of eye —head coordination during orienting gaze shifts. Trends Neurosci. 

15 , 174 –179 (1992). 

39. Delreux, V., Abeele, S. V., Crommelinck, M. & Roucoux, A. Interactions between Goal -

Directed Eye and Arm Movements: Arguments for an Interdependent Motor Control. J. Mot. 

Behav. 23 , 147 –151 (1991). 

40. Tomlinson, R. D. & Bahra, P. S. Combined eye -head gaze shifts in the primate. I. Metrics. J. 

Neurophysiol. 56 , 1542 –1557 (1986). 

41. Volle, M. & Guitton, D. Human gaze shifts in which head and eyes are not initially aligned. 

Experimental Brain Research , 463 –470 (1993). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

42. Fuller, J. H. Eye position and target amplitude effects on human visual saccadic latencies. 

Experimental brain research 109 , 457 –466 (1996). 

43. Zahler, S. H. et al . Hindbrain modules differentially transform activity of single collicular 

neurons to coordinate movements. Cell 186 , 3062 –3078.e20 (2023). 

44. Leigh, R. J. & Zee, D. S. in The Neurology of Eye Movements (Oxford University Press, 

2015). 

45. Cullen, K. E. Chapter 3 - Vestibular motor control. Handbook of Clinical Neurology 195 ,

31 –54 (2023). 

46. Iwashita, M., Kanai, R., Funabiki, K., Matsuda, K. & Hirano, T. Dynamic properties, 

interactions and adaptive modifications of vestibulo -ocular reflex and optokinetic response in 

mice. Neurosci. Res. 39 , 299 –311 (2001). 

47. Stahl, J. S., van Alphen, A. M. & De Zeeuw, C. I. A comparison of video and magnetic 

search coil recordings of mouse eye movements. J. Neurosci. Methods 99 , 101 –110 (2000). 

48. Oommen, B. S. & Stahl, J. S. Eye orientation during static tilts and its relationship to 

spontaneous head pitch in the laboratory mouse. Brain Res. 1193 , 57 –66 (2008). 

49. Vidal, P., Degallaix , L., Josset, P., Gasc, J. & Cullen, K. E. Postural and locomotor control in 

normal and vestibularly deficient mice. J. Physiol. 559 , 625 –638 (2004). 

50. Andreescu, C. E., Martijn M De, R., Chris I De, Z. & Marcel T G De, J. Otolith Deprivation 

Induces Optokinetic Compensation. J. Neurophysiol. 94 , 3487 –3496 (2005). 

51. Migliaccio, A. A., Meierhofer, R. & Della Santina, C. C. Characterization of the 3D angular 

vestibulo -ocular reflex in C57BL6 mice. Experimental Brain Research 210 , 489 –501 (2011). 

52. van Alphen, A. M., Stahl, J. S. & De Zeeuw, C. I. The dynamic characteristics of the mouse 

horizontal vestibulo -ocular and optokinetic response. Brain Res. 890 , 296 –305 (2001). 

53. Shanidze, N., Kim, A. H., Raphael, Y. & King, W. M. Eye –head coordination in the guinea 

pig I. Responses to passive whole -body rotations. Experimental Brain Research 205 , 395 –404 

(2010). 

54. Shanidze, N., Kim, A. H., Loewenstein, S., Raphael, Y. & King, W. M. Eye -head 

coordination in the guinea pig II. Responses to self -generated (voluntary) head movements. 

Experimental Brain Research 205 , 445 –454 (2010). 

55. Samonds, J. M., Geisler, W. S. & Priebe, N. J. Natural image and receptive field statistics 

predict saccade sizes. Nat. Neurosci. 21 , 1591 –1599 (2018). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

56. Sakatani, T. & Isa, T. Quantitative analysis of spontaneous saccade -like rapid eye 

movements in C57BL/6 mice. Neurosci. Res. 58 , 324 –331 (2007). 

57. Wang, L., Liu, M., Segraves, M. A. & Cang, J. Visual Experience Is Required for the 

Development of Eye Movement Maps in the Mouse Superior Colliculus. J. Neurosci. 35 , 12281 

(2015). 

58. Sakatani, T. & Isa, T. Quantitative analysis of spontaneous saccade -like rapid eye 

movements in C57BL/6 mice. Neurosci. Res. 58 , 324 –331 (2007). 

59. Galiñanes, G. L., Bonardi, C. & Huber, D. Directional Reaching for Water as a Cortex -

Dependent Behavioral Framework for Mice. Cell Reports 22 , 2767 –2783 (2018). 

60. Goossens, H. H. L. M. & Opstal, A. J. V. Human eye -head coordination in two dimensions 

under different sensorimotor conditions. Experimental Brain Research 114 , 542 –560 (1997). 

61. Zangemeister, W. H. & Stark, L. Gaze latency: variable interactions of head and eye latency. 

Exp. Neurol. 75 , 389 –406 (1982). 

62. Goossens, H. H. L. M. & Opstal , A. J. V. Human eye -head coordination in two dimensions 

under different sensorimotor conditions. Experimental Brain Research 114 , 542 –560 (1997). 

63. Cullen, K. E. in Neuroscience in the 21st Century: From Basic to Clinical (eds Pfaff, D. W., 

Volkow, N. D. & Rubenstein, J.) 1 –45 (Springer New York, New York, NY, 2020). 

64. Galiana, H. L. & Guitton, D. Central Organization and Modeling of Eye -Head Coordination 

during Orienting Gaze Shiftsa. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 656 , 452 –471 (1992). 

65. Sylvestre, P. A. & Cullen, K. E. Premotor Correlates of Integrated Feedback Control for 

Eye –Head Gaze Shifts. J. Neurosci. 26 , 4922 (2006). 

66. Tomlinson, R. D. Combined eye -head gaze shifts in the primate. III. Contributions to the 

accuracy of gaze saccades. J. Neurophysiol. 64 , 1873 –1891 (1990). 

67. Guitton, D., Bergeron, A., Choi, W. Y. & Matsuo, S. On the feedback control of orienting 

gaze shifts made with eye and head movements. Prog. Brain Res. 142 , 55 –68 (2003). 

68. Haji -Abolhassani, I., Guitton, D. & Galiana, H. L. Modeling eye -head gaze shifts in multiple 

contexts without motor planning. J. Neurophysiol. 116 , 1956 –1985 (2016). 

69. Todorov, E. Optimality principles in sensorimotor control. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 907 –915 (2004). 

70. Scott, S. H. A Functional Taxonomy of Bottom -Up Sensory Feedback Processing for Motor 

Actions. Trends Neurosci. 39 , 512 –526 (2016). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

71. Krauzlis, R. J. The Control of Voluntary Eye Movements: New Perspectives. Neuroscientist 

11 , 124 –137 (2005). 

72. Tehovnik, E. J. et al . Visuomotor control in mice and primates. Neuroscience & 

Biobehavioral Reviews 130 , 185 –200 (2021). 

73. Bahill, A. T., Clark, M. R. & Stark, L. The main sequence, a tool for studying human eye 

movements. Math. Biosci. 24 , 191 –204 (1975). 

74. Pélisson, D., Guitton, D. & Munoz, D. P. Compensatory eye and head movements generated 

by the cat following stimulation -induced perturbations in gaze position. Exp. Brain Res. 78 , 654 –

658 (1989). 

75. Guillaume, A. & Pélisson, D. Kinematics and eye -head coordination of gaze shifts evoked 

from different sites in the superior colliculus of the cat. J. Physiol. 577 , 779 –794 (2006). 

76. Stubblefield, E. A., Costabile, J. D. & Felsen, G. Optogenetic investigation of the role of the 

superior colliculus in orienting movements. Behav. Brain Res. 255 , 55 –63 (2013). 

77. Wilson, J. J., Alexandre, N., Trentin, C. & Tripodi, M. Three -Dimensional Representation of 

Motor Space in the Mouse Superior Colliculus. Current Biology 28 , 1744 –1755.e12 (2018). 

78. Felsen, G. & Mainen, Z. F. Neural Substrates of Sensory -Guided Locomotor Decisions in the 

Rat Superior Colliculus. Neuron 60 , 137 –148 (2008). 

79. Hughes, A. A quantitative analysis of the cat retinal ganglion cell topography. J. Comp. 

Neurol. 163 , 107 –128 (1975). 

80. McIlwain, J. T. Orientation of slit pupil and visual streak in the eye of the cat. J. Comp. 

Neurol. 175 , 337 –344 (1977). 

81. Stone, J. The number and distribution of ganglion cells in the cat's retina. J. Comp. Neurol. 

180 , 753 –771 (1978). 

82. Grünert, U. & Martin, P. R. Cell types and cell circuits in human and non -human primate 

retina. Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 78 , 100844 (2020). 

83. Jeon, C. J., Strettoi, E. & Masland, R. H. The major cell populations of the mouse retina. J. 

Neurosci. 18 , 8936 –8946 (1998). 

84. Bleckert, A., Schwartz, G. W., Turner, M. H., Rieke, F. & Wong, R. O. L. Visual Space Is 

Represented by Nonmatching Topographies of Distinct Mouse Retinal Ganglion Cell Types. 

Current Biology 24 , 310 –315 (2014). 

85. van Beest, E. H. et al . Mouse visual cortex contains a region of enhanced spatial resolution. 

Nature Communications 12 , 4029 (2021). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

86. Parker, P. R. L. et al . A dynamic sequence of visual processing initiated by gaze shifts. Nat. 

Neurosci. 26 , 2192 –2202 (2023). 

87. Gordon, J. A. & Stryker, M. P. Experience -dependent plasticity of binocular responses in the 

primary visual cortex of the mouse. J. Neurosci. 16 , 3274 –3286 (1996). 

88. Ibbotson, M. & Jung, Y. J. Origins of Functional Organization in the Visual Cortex. Front. 

Syst. Neurosci. 14 , 10 (2020). 

89. Dräger, U. C. & Hubel, D. H. Studies of visual function and its decay in mice with hereditary 

retinal degeneration. J. Comp. Neurol. 180 , 85 –114 (1978). 

90. Scholl, B., Burge, J. & Priebe, N. J. Binocular integration and disparity selectivity in mouse 

primary visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 109 , 3013 –3024 (2013). 

91. La Chioma, A., Bonhoeffer, T. & Hübener, M. Area -Specific Mapping of Binocular 

Disparity across Mouse Visual Cortex. Current Biology 29 , 2954 –2960.e5 (2019). 

92. Holmgren, C. D. et al . Visual pursuit behavior in mice maintains the pursued prey on the 

retinal region with least optic flow. Elife 10 , 10.7554/eLife.70838 (2021). 

93. Wallace, D. J. et al . Eye saccades align optic flow with retinal specializations during object 

pursuit in freely moving ferrets. Current Biology 35 , 761 –775.e10 (2025). 

94. Cartmill, M. Rethinking primate origins. Science 184 , 436 –443 (1974). 

95. Nityananda, V. & Read, J. C. A. Stereopsis in animals: evolution, function and mechanisms. 

J. Exp. Biol. 220 , 2502 –2512 (2017). 

96. Percie du Sert, N. et al . The ARRIVE guidelines 2.0: Updated guidelines for reporting 

animal research. PLoS Biol. 18 , e3000410 (2020). 

97. Schonewille, M. et al . Reevaluating the Role of LTD in Cerebellar Motor Learning. Neuron 

70 , 43 –50 (2011). 

98. Chang, H. H. V., Cook, A. A., Watt, A. J. & Cullen, K. E. Loss of Flocculus Purkinje Cell 

Firing Precision Leads to Impaired Gaze Stabilization in a Mouse Model of Spinocerebellar 

Ataxia Type 6 (SCA6). Cells 11 , 2739. doi: 10.3390/cells11172739 (2022). 

99. Raju, M. H., Friedman, L., Bouman, T. M. & Komogortsev, O. V. Determining Which Sine 

Wave Frequencies Correspond to Signal and Which Correspond to Noise in Eye -Tracking Time -

Series. J. Eye Mov. Res. 14 , 10.16910/jemr.14.3.5. doi: 10.16910/jemr.14.3.5. eCollection 2021 

(2023). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint

100. Cullen, K. E., Rey, C. G., Guitton, D. & Galiana, H. L. The use of system identification 

techniques in the analysis of oculomotor burst neuron spike train dynamics. J. Comput. Neurosci. 

3, 347 –368 (1996). 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.30.715285 doi: bioRxiv preprint