Title: ChatMuse: Supporting In-Person Small-Group Conversation Experience with a Proactive Assistive AI Agent in Mixed Reality

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18556v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Jul 2026 00:23:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# ChatMuse: Supporting In-Person Small-Group Conversation Experience with a Proactive Assistive AI Agent in Mixed Reality 

# Shaoze Zhou 

szhou010@fiu.edu Florida International University Miami, FL, USA 

# Joaquin Frangi 

jfran348@fiu.edu Florida International University Miami, FL, USA 

# Diana Nelly Rivera Rodriguez 

drive217@fiu.edu Florida International University Miami, FL, USA 

# Rawan Alghofaili 

rawan@utdallas.edu University of Texas at Dallas Richardson, TX, USA 

# Janet G. Johnson 

jgjanet@umich.edu University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI, USA 

# Lingyao Li 

lingyaoli@arizona.edu University of Arizona Tucson, AZ, USA 

# Renkai Ma 

renkai.ma@uc.edu University of Cincinnati Cincinnati, OH, USA 

# Christine Lisetti 

lisetti@fiu.edu Florida International University Miami, FL, USA 

# Chen Chen 

chechen@fiu.edu Florida International University Miami, FL, USA (a)  (b)  (c) 

> ChatMuse -Supported
> Participant
> I felt that AI could
> take away many job
> opportunities …
> Unsupported
> Conversation Participant
> Recommended Speech Example
> Suggested Nonverbal Behaviors

# …

Third -Person View  First -Person View 

> ChatMuse’s
> Suggestion

Figure 1: ChatMuse provides real-time, MR information support for in-person small-group conversations; (a) a third-person view of a three-participant conversation; (b) a first-person view from the MR user; (c) example supporting information. 

## Abstract 

In-person small-group conversations play a crucial role in social in-teraction. However, achieving effective group conversations can be challenging and cognitively demanding. While Mixed Reality (MR) headsets show promise as a conversational support system by pre-senting relevant information through MR overlays, it remains un-clear how such supporting information should be designed for in-person group conversations. We propose ChatMuse, an MR-based proactive assistive system for in-person small-group conversations. ChatMuse analyzes verbal and nonverbal cues from all conversation participants and proactively provides guides on the user’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors. The behavioral responses of the supported users are then used to improve ChatMuse’s support capabilities in subsequent interactions. Our within-subject studies alongside focus groups with six participant groups ( 𝑁 = 18 ) revealed seven key benefits that ChatMuse provides in supporting users’ engage-ment and contribution to in-person small-group conversations. Our research around ChatMuse represents a design exploration of a new interaction space that investigates the feasibility of supporting in-person small-group conversations through a proactive assistive AI agent in MR. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Mixed / augmented reality .

## Keywords 

Mixed Reality (MR), In-Person Small-Group Conversation, AI Agent 

## 1 Introduction 

“Talking to people — truly talking — is a skill. Group conversations are like a game of jump rope; you have to find the right rhythm to jump in, or you just end up getting hit in the face.” — Amy Meredith Poehler In-person small-group conversations in everyday and profes-sional settings are critical to share information, spark new ideas, and build interpersonal relationships [ 30 , 50 , 71 , 113 , 116 ]. How-ever, achieving effective in-person small-group conversations can be challenging and cognitively demanding, as the real-time nature requires full attention, provides no editing time, and involves under-standing of nonverbal cues [ 29 , 45 , 127 ]. As a result, conversation arXiv:2607.18556v1 [cs.HC] 20 Jul 2026 Zhou et al. 

participants need to understand complex interaction dynamics, ad-here to social norms, manage multiple speakers, and tailor spoken messages for a broader audience [117]. Recent Mixed Reality (MR) headsets show promise as conver-sational supporting systems by presenting relevant information through MR overlays. In dyadic conversation, prior research has examined how critical communication support, such as keywords extracted from spoken speech [ 44 , 58 ], relevant background con-text [ 58 ], and guidance for subsequent utterances [ 126 , 130 ], can be used to facilitate in-person conversation. However, it remains unclear how a similar conversational support can be designed for in-person group conversations. Generalizing the design of MR-based conversational support systems from dyadic to group conversa-tions is challenging: compared to dyadic conversations, in-person group conversations involve more complex dynamics due to the well-known “many minds problem,” in which communication and interaction challenges increase as more participants join, making turn-taking, listening, and disclosure more difficult [29, 120]. Designing proactive support for a variety of conversational expe-riences is promising to enhance synchronous online [ 53 , 77 , 81 ] and in-person [ 109 , 126 ] dyadic and group interactions. Proactive AI ,rooted in the framework of mixed-initiative interaction [ 8, 52 , 101 ], envisions an AI agent that can autonomously determine when and how to act without requiring explicit user requests. Recent con-versational AI agents such as GPT-Live [ 4] have demonstrated the capability to provide proactive backchanneling. While prior work, 

e.g., SocialMind [ 126 ], has demonstrated the design of proactive conversational support systems for dyadic interactions — where real-time visual suggestions are rendered on heads-up displays — it remains unclear how such designs can be generalized to group 

conversations; unlike dyadic settings, group conversations involve more than two participants and introduce more complex interaction dynamic; designing support for group conversations therefore re-quires addressing additional challenges beyond those encountered in dyadic interactions, such as the need to address the long-standing many minds problem [ 29 ], to adapt to the behaviors of multiple participants and conversational partners, and to manage issues like participation inequality [29, 48]. We propose ChatMuse 1, a novel MR-based proactive supporting system for in-person small-group conversations. Figure 1 illustrates an example experience in which ChatMuse provides suggestions to an MR user during a three-person group conversation on the impact of AI on the future of work. During a conversation, ChatMuse an-alyzes both verbal and nonverbal cues from all participants and proactively provides real-time guidance on speech and nonverbal behaviors for the MR user. User’s verbal and behavioral responses are then used to improve ChatMuse’s support capabilities in subse-quent interactions. Grounded in user-centered [ 100 ] and participatory design [ 97 ]processes, we first explored key Design Considerations (DCs) by conducting a formative study ( 𝑁 = 10 ) using the provotype [ 14 ]and focus group [ 72 ]. We developed two testbeds using Meta Quest 3S [ 57 ] to investigate the affordances of proactive information sup-port and the types of information users might seek while interacting    

> 1Linguistically, muse often refers to the personified force who is the source of inspira-tion [ 124 ]. We use Chat Muse to metaphorically describe how a proactive AI agent can intervene in and facilitate in-person small-group conversations.

with multiple conversation participants. Three DCs were identified concerning how to maximize the benefits of proactive information support and how to effectively design supporting information. We then prototyped ChatMuse on Meta Quest Pro [ 56 , 88 ] and conducted within-subject studies alongside focus groups with six participant groups ( 𝑁 = 18 ) to evaluate the utility and usability of the AI-generated conversational support rendered as an MR overlay. By analyzing the focus group discussions alongside the support information and the rationales inferred by the AI agent, we identi-fied seven key benefits that ChatMuse provided to support users’ engagement and in-person small-group conversations. While most participants found ChatMuse helpful, both in the content of the support information and how the agent determined when to deliver it, some noted instances where support was provided unnecessarily or, conversely, where needed support was not delivered. Our research around ChatMuse represents a design exploration of a new interaction space that investigates the feasibility of sup-porting in-person small-group conversations through a proactive assistive AI agent in MR. Overall, we contribute: (i) an interactive experience that supports users in engaging and participating in small-group conversations through private AI-driven information support; (ii) a pipeline design that represents key group conversa-tion contexts for an LLM agent, allowing ChatMuse to capture and interpret both verbal and nonverbal behaviors by leveraging the reasoning and social behaviors of LLMs; (iii) a mixed-methods understanding of how and to what extent AI can leverage complex contexts to support group conversants. 

## 2 Related Works 2.1 The Challenge of In-Person Conversation 

An effective group conversation should be purposeful and focused, and involve active participation, along with respectful communi-cation, such as active listening and constructive feedback [ 102 ]. Engaging effectively in group conversations can be challenging and cognitively demanding [ 10 , 37 , 45 ]. First, conversation extends beyond spoken words. Mehrabian’s rule [ 86 , 87 ] highlights the im-portance of nonverbal signaling in interpersonal communication, such as vocal tone and body language. Adding more participants to a conversation also creates challenges for both speakers and listeners, a phenomenon often referred to as the many minds problem [ 29 ]. Compared with dyadic conversations, larger groups reduce the air-time available to each participant, make turn-taking increasingly difficult, and weaken or obscure backchannel feedback. Second, individuals may misinterpret the context of a conversation due to differences in background knowledge or misunderstandings of nonverbal cues. Those experiencing social withdrawal may feel uncomfortable — or even anxious — when engaging in conversa-tions [ 112 ], which can hinder their ability to build relationships in daily life and collaborate effectively in professional settings. 

## 2.2 Supporting Group Conversation with MR 

Prior work has explored the use of MR to support in-person con-versations in both dyadic and group settings. ChatMuse 

Dyadic conversation. For example, in a dyadic interaction, ChatAR [44 ] rendered supplementary information derived from speech key-words within a display region positioned relative to the facial lo-cation of the conversational partner. RealityChat [ 58 ] introduced a HoloLens-based system that visualized speech keywords and displayed supplementary images when specific keywords were se-lected. SocialMind [ 126 ] demonstrated how an LLM-based virtual assistant could provide in-situ social assistance during live dyadic interactions. Empathetic AuRea [ 122 ] employed colored ring over-lays to visualize and amplify the emotions of the conversational partner. Understood [ 130 ] introduced a HoloLens-based system designed to assist individuals with ADHD during conversations by providing real-time summarization, context-aware word sugges-tions, and reminders for topic shifts. WSCoach [ 131 ] used real-time auditory feedback delivered via a wearable device to help users reduce unwanted words in everyday communication. A second line of research explored how MR notifications can be designed to sup-port face-to-face dyadic interactions. Janaka et al. [ 60 ] investigated MR notification placement, while ParaGlassMenu [ 21 ] introduced a circular menu overlay around the partner, both aiming to enable MR interaction while minimizing disruptions to ongoing conversa-tions. Despite the validated effectiveness in dyadic interactions, it remains challenging to generalize these designs to group settings, where users must attend to multiple conversational partners. 

Group conversation. Researchers have explored group conver-sations with more than two participants. Zhou et al. [133 ] demon-strated the need for and value of providing private information support to facilitate in-person group conversations. Logue et al. [31 ]employed Google Glass to provide presenters with real-time behav-ioral feedback in scenarios such as public speaking. ConversAR [ 11 ]presented an AR system to support group conversations for second language learners, providing real-time translations of their part-ners’ speech. Commercial MR applications, e.g., Spatial [ 118 ], have explored shared workspaces to facilitate group conversations for the future of work. Johnson et al. [62 ] examined the potential of collaborative humanoid AI agents to facilitate group conversations. Building on a similar in-person small-group conversation context, but not as a shared facilitator, ChatMuse examines the feasibility of providing real-time private conversational textual support to the user, controlled by a proactive AI agent. 

## 2.3 Supporting Group Conversation with AI 

While the studies above focus on in-person group conversations, a complementary line of research has investigated the use of AI to enhance remote conversations, typically mediated through video-conferencing and Instant Messaging (IM). Application design in these domains provides insights that are transferable to ChatMuse. 

Multi-party videoconferencing. Existing research has demon-strated how AI agents can be integrated to understand the social role of conversational participants [ 123 ], provide on-demand high-lights, summaries, and actions [ 9, 64 , 95 , 96 , 134 ], reflect goals [ 25 ], track social dynamics [ 12 ], as well as address issues of inclusion and participation [ 43 , 47 , 69 , 98 ]. Others have considered critical nonverbal cues, including emotions [ 132 ], bodily gestures [ 27 ], and environmental factors [ 28 ]. Commercial applications such as Teams and Zoom have introduced reactive AI agents — Copilot [ 95 ] and AI Companion [ 134 ] — that allow users to request information dur-ing group meetings. More recently, CoExplorer [ 106 ] introduced a GenAI-powered adaptive interface that optimized task space based on users’ goal-oriented input and real-time activity context. 

Instant Messaging (IM). AI agents have also been explored to facil-itate group conversations in IM applications. These AI agents often exhibit context-aware behaviors that support group conversation, through integrated memory, planning, and reflection [ 107 , 125 ]. Hohenstein et al. [51 ] investigated AI-supported messaging through Google Allo’s “smart reply” feature, which generated suggested responses by analyzing the conversation history. Kim et al. [68 ]designed a facilitator chatbot to enhance group discussions by struc-turing discussion time, promoting equitable participation, and orga-nizing participants’ ideas. Others, e.g., [ 75 , 76 ], showed that AI chat-bots could promote more equitable participation in group decision-making and support well-being-oriented peer interactions [ 80 ]. A few recent works have explored the feasibility of AI agents in 

proactive roles, building on earlier research in mixed-initiative in-teractions that envisioned agents autonomously determining when and how to act [ 8, 52 , 79 ]. In the context of group conversations, Houde et al. [53 ] developed a conversational agent in the form of a Slack bot to investigate how proactive and reactive agent in-terventions influence group ideation. Liu et al. [ 81 ] investigated a proactive agent capable of generating inner thoughts by interpret-ing the conversational context. In contrast to the prior research, we focus on MR-mediated, in-person small-group conversations. De-signing support for in-person conversations differs from text-based communication, as it requires addressing additional challenges aris-ing from rich nonverbal contexts. Beyond spoken speech, designing ChatMuse requires an understanding of nonverbal cues. 

## 3 Formative Study 

Grounded in user-centered design [ 100 ], we first explored the key DCs of ChatMuse by addressing two Research Questions (RQs): 

how should proactive support be designed, and how can it facilitate in-person group conversation experiences? (RQ1) ; and what types of information are needed to support in-person group conversation experiences? (RQ2) 

## 3.1 Study Design 

We recruited 10 participants (age, 𝑀 = 25 .5, 𝑆𝐷 = 3.5) and formed two small groups with three participants each and one larger group with four participants (Figure 3, Appendix E). FP# and FG# were used to indicate Formative study Participants and participant Group. Participants were first introduced to the project. Each group was then instructed to complete three phases. 

Phase 1: Onboarding. Participants were asked to complete de-mographic questionnaires and the Interpersonal Communication 

Skills Inventory (ICSI) — a standard questionnaire that assesses individuals’ communication skills [ 1 , 13 , 16 ] (Appendix D). Under-standing participants’ communication skills allowed us to better interpret the qualitative data. 

Phase 2: Focus Group. Focus groups were conducted with each participant group. We focused on two guiding questions: (1) Given your prior experience, when do you think group conversation dy-namics usually deteriorate, and what is your strategy to enhance Zhou et al. (a)  (b) 

Figure 2: (a) FPV of provotypes in the formative study. (b) Zoomed-in view of the supporting information. 

the conversation experience? (2) When can information support be useful during in-person group conversations, and how should such support be designed? Despite being guided by predefined questions, the discussions were open-ended; participants were encouraged to elaborate on their responses based on their experiences. 

Phase 3: Participatory Design . To understand the design oppor-tunities for proactive information support and the information-seeking behaviors of participants, we developed two Provo Types (PT) [ 14 ] using the Meta Quest 3S [ 57 ] to provoke discussion among stakeholders, including: (PT1) a WoZ prototype that allowed con-versation participants to experience proactive information support, with a researcher familiar with the designated topic controlling the supporting information via a dedicated dashboard and present-ing it as an MR overlay; and (PT2) a MR prototype that allowed MR users to type questions during in-person group conversations and used GPT-4o-mini [ 3] to generate supporting information in response to the query input by the MR user. The support overlay was positioned approximately 70 cm in front of the user, aligned with the forward direction of their headpose, following Meta’s MR design guidelines [89]. Participants were instructed to experience two provotypes. Fig-ure 2 shows the First-Person View (FPV) of the provotypes. A focus group discussion was conducted after experiencing each provotype. Each participant group was instructed to discuss open-ended topics, including where to take a Christmas trip in California and how AI may reshape the future of work . To prevent carry-over effects, topic assignments were counterbalanced across participant groups. 

Data Analysis. We used thematic analysis [ 17 ] and a deductive and inductive coding approach [ 74 ] to analyze the transcribed data. Two researchers were involved in the coding process. RQs were used as the basis for deductive coding. Recorded FPV and Third-Person 

View (TPV) were referenced during data analysis. 

## 3.2 Findings 

Our analysis converged on four themes. Participants who experi-enced PT1 and PT2 are highlighted in green and blue , respec-tively. Participants without color highlighting were other group members in the same conversations who did not wear the MR headset and could not see the private supporting information. 

Affordance of proactive information support. Overall, all par-ticipants agreed that the proactive information support helped maintain focus in many conversation scenarios. A few participants also emphasized the importance and value of real-time support, for example, “as real-time as possible would be the best!” (FP2). First, participants valued proactive information support when con-versations stalled or drifted off topic . FP1 , who scored below average in all four aspects of ICSI, commented: “this is actually a really good thing that while having a conversation, the agent is giving instructions on how to carry the conversation forward.” FP2, one of FP1 ’s conversation partners, mentioned a noticeable change in participation, commenting that FP1 was “generally a bit silent,” 

but appeared more engaged, possibly due to the assistance provided by the supporting information. Participants highlighted the ben-efit of receiving timely, in-situ supporting information, especially when the conversation deviated from the planned topic. Examples included “ [...] even when I am clueless about what to talk, the instruc-tions were helpful in actually keeping the conversation right to the point because we were actually deviating from the topic and talking about traffic or something” ( FP1 ), and “It’s helpful for meetings in workspace, where you have a goal and want to finish it quickly” (FP6). Second, participants appreciated receiving suggestions on how the MR user could contribute to the conversation . FP1 sug-gested the usefulness of “some important points which we have to consider, but we might forget it at some point.” FP4 pointed out: 

“[ FP1 ] was better at focusing on the particular topic and asking some interesting questions to make the conversations interesting.” FP7 highlighted its value for people who feel nervous speaking with strangers: “I think it definitely helped [...] there’s a degree of like ner-vousness when you’re talking to strangers.” FP5 suggested “if there is a silence, this can help [...] sometimes you just need to get the talking going.” Finally, the focus group highlighted the benefits of provid-ing additional information during conversations when the topic was less familiar . FP4 highlighted that “it was about Christ-mas in California. We didn’t know much about that. Some [supporting information] can be helpful.” In contrast, supporting information presented at less optimal moments could be disruptive, particularly during casual conversations. FP2 described: “I felt [ FP1 ] came in between sometimes when we were trying to talk and be casual [...] it’s not something relevant to what we were discussing.” 

Supporting information must preserve, rather than replace, participants’ ownership of the conversation. While partici-pants recognized the value of the supporting information overlay, they stressed that it should not give the impression of replacing participants’ ownership of the conversation. For example, FP1 noted: “I feel more comfortable and helpful [...] and rather than being pushed, I can contribute my part of the conversation with that.” Partic-ipants reported feeling pressured to respond when the supporting information appeared overly directive or when it did not align with their own thought processes. For example, “Even though I know they’re just suggestions, I feel pressure to respond and relate to the instructions” ( FP7 ). FP7 further noted that perceived pressure can increase when a knowledge gap exists between the supporting information and the user, for example: “it just said ask some activ-ities that can be done during summer, but I don’t really know how summer looks like [in California].” 

Types of supporting information. During Phase 3, a variety of supporting information was requested by FP3 , FP5 , and FP8 . We identified four types of supporting information that participants sought: summaries of the prior conversation contexts ( FP3 , FP8 ), ChatMuse 

overlooked aspects of the conversation ( FP8 ), factual clarifications of unfamiliar topics ( FP5 , FP8 ), opinions from other conversation participants ( FP3 ). For example, FP3 valued the system’s ability to summarize prior conversational context: “one thing that was most helpful for me is that I was asking the agent to summarize every guest opinion [...] they were giving the summary and during that I did forget his name [refer to FP4].” While participants perceived most of the AI-inferred supporting information as useful, our findings revealed several improvements. FP3 suggested shortening the generated prior conversation summary to make it more readable and glanceable on-the-fly: “the summary is good, but it is a little bit longer [...] I don’t know if I’m going to go down or something [ FP3 refers to reading through it].” FP7 suggested the usefulness of indicating nonverbal cues of conversation participants due to 

“struggling with recognizing sometimes fairly evident social cues.” 

Placement of supporting information. Participants reported mixed opinions regarding the visual placement of the MR sup-porting overlay. A few participants considered the current design acceptable. For example, “I like to have it placed wherever I was looking [...] if it is placed on top, maybe we won’t be noticing it while having a conversation. So I think it is a perfect placement [...] I think the distance was good” ( FP10 ). However, multiple key find-ings converged across the focus group discussions. First, a static placement can often cause unnecessary context switching, as users must shift attention between the conversation and the displayed information. While FP1 acknowledged the initial placement, he suggested: “once it appears in one location, it just stays there. If I look to the side, I can’t see it.” FP3 emphasized the importance of placing the supporting information overlay according to the participant with whom one is conversing: “the main concern is that the [MR overlay] should be dynamic. It should keep moving [...] For example, if it is fixed over there [ FP3 pointed to FP2], then I have to take a look at him in order to read what the response is.” FP3 suggested that the placement of supporting information should be adapted to the participants who are actively speaking: “if [the overlay] can move to that person while talking, that could be really awesome [...] let’s say if [ FP1 ] is talking, [the supporting information] can move to his direction.” Second, some participants noted that the MR overlay can obstruct important nonverbal cues. For example, “the best way would be to display text on top of the person he is speaking to [...] so you don’t break the eye contact” ( FP5 ). 

## 3.3 Summary of Design Considerations (DCs) 

Our findings suggest that while proactive supporting information can be useful, it should augment rather than replace participants’ ex-perience of engaging in in-person small-group conversation. Three DCs are summarized from our formative study. 

DC1 Proactive support should be delivered when conver-sations stall, drift off topic, or participants lack direction or familiarity with the topic. While participants appreciated the helpfulness of proactive support, they emphasized concerns about receiving supporting information when it was not needed. The design of ChatMuse should demonstrate effective ways to control when to deliver proactive supporting information by leveraging heterogeneous verbal and nonverbal conversational context. Group  

> Conversation
> Contexts
> Estimate usefulness of the
> support information
> Captured Speech
> Voice Tone
> ChatMuse
> Renderer
> Proactive
> Decision
> Support
> Information
> Gaze
> Formation of Gaze
> ChatMuse’s
> Sensing
> Setup
> Usefulness Score
> Pre -trained
> LLM
> In -Person
> Small -Group
> Conversation (b) Feedback Enhancement Pipeline
> (a) Feedforward Inference Pipeline
> 𝑃 𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑓
> 𝑃 𝑇 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑒
> Rationale Data Log

Figure 3: ChatMuse’s agentic pipeline design. DC2 Supporting information should preserve conversa-tional ownership while integrating verbal and nonverbal contexts to offer summaries, clarifications, overlooked as-pects, and relevant others’ perspectives. The suggestive infor-mation should be context-aware and depend on the conversation participants. The type of information may vary during different phases of the conversation. Unlike online conversations ( e.g., those outlined in Section 2.3), support for in-person interactions should account for both verbal and nonverbal behaviors. 

DC3 MR support should be easily consumable during con-versation while retaining unobtrusive access to critical non-verbal cues. An effective design of ChatMuse should consider the placements of the supporting information overlay. Given the indis-pensable role of nonverbal cues in interpersonal communication, the real-time generated MR overlay should not occlude conversa-tion partners while maintaining readability. 

## 4 ChatMuse System Design 

Our design of ChatMuse is informed by Section 3.3. We consider a collocated small-group conversational setting with three to four par-ticipants, in which each participant’s headpose can be tracked and speech can be captured (Section 4.1). Figure 3 shows an overview of ChatMuse system, which includes two pipelines: (1) a feed-forward inference pipeline that allows the ChatMuse agent to generate proactive support in real time by leveraging the verbal and nonverbal behavioral contexts (Figure 3a, Section 4.3), and (2) a feedback enhancement pipeline that, in turn, uses implicit non-verbal behavior to enhance the ChatMuse agent’s ability to assist the MR user in subsequent interactions (Figure 3b, Section 4.4). ChatMuse agent leverages a pre-trained LLM to interpret verbal and nonverbal behaviors, decide when to proactively intervene, and generate suggestive text, which is rendered through the MR headset. Each LLM invocation uses a dedicated prompt, comprising a role prompt (𝑃𝑇 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑒 ), an inference prompt (𝑃𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑓 ). 𝑃𝑇 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑒 defines the agent’s role and the types of supporting information described in Section 3.2. 𝑃𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑓 aggregates key verbal and nonverbal cues from the group conversation context and is continuously updated by the feedforward inference and feedback enhancement pipelines as the conversation progresses. 

## 4.1 Scenarios and Setups 

Meta Quest Pro [ 56 ] is used due to its ease of prototyping and built-in eye tracking [ 55 ]. Although ChatMuse appears to be more Zhou et al. (a)  (b)  

> Tracking RGB -D Camera
> Anchor for Calibrating Camera
> ChatMuse User

Figure 4: Setup of ChatMuse. (a) TPV with three participants; (b) FPV with the forward direction of the tracked headpose visualized 

effective on current AI glasses, e.g., the recent Ray-Ban Display [ 92 ], today’s AI glasses do not support eye tracking. Our setup includes an Orbbec Femto Bolt camera [ 105 ], an RGB-D camera that sup-ports multi-person pose tracking via Azure Kinect [ 104 ], to track all conversation participants other than the MR user. ChatMuse approx-imates the attention of non-MR users using their forward-facing di-rection. While tracking pupil can give an accurate direction of visual attention, estimating the gaze of multiple users remains challenging. Using headpose to approximate visual attention has been shown to achieve high accuracy in the horizontal direction [ 61 ], which aligns with the primary orientation encountered in group conversations. We also use an external microphone to capture speech, which is then processed through Azure’s real-time transcription and speaker diarization services [94] to produce timestamped, speaker-labeled transcripts. Figure 4a shows the setup of ChatMuse. Figure 4b shows the tracked participants from the FPV of the ChatMuse-supported user. Appendix B outlines implementation details. Appendix C presents the benchmarking results for the tracking performance of the RGB-D camera across the pre-designated seating areas. 

## 4.2 Proactive AI Agent and the Formatting of Support Information 

Design of proactive agent. ChatMuse uses 𝑃𝑇 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑒 and 𝑃𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑓 to in-fer a proactive decision and support information . The proactive decision is a dedicated flag used to determine whether the support information can be a useful addition to current conversation and should be rendered. While proactive support can benefit MR users, rendering it unnecessarily may introduce unwanted distractions and pressure ( DC1 ). ChatMuse provides an opportunity to inves-tigate how effectively today’s agents can make proactive decisions by interpreting heterogeneous conversational contexts. 

Formatting of the support information. Structure and format-ting of the supporting information are defined by 𝑃𝑇 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑒 . Guided by DC2 , 𝑃𝑇 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑒 specifies how the agent may provide conversational support, including suggestions for nonverbal behaviors, example phrases the user could say, the appropriate voice tone that the user can follow, and relevant background information to support par-ticipation. Drawing on Yang et al. ’s findings [ 126 ] on designing an MR-based dyadic communication support, we structure the sup-port information as bullet points, including example phrases that the MR user can follow. To ensure the supported user can easily {    

> “speaker”: “speaker_1”,
> “speech”: “How might AI reshape the future of job?”
> “start time”: 10
> “end time”: 11
> “speech emotion”: “neutral”
> “attention behavior”: {
> “speaker_1”: [“speaker_2”, “speaker_3”],
> “speaker_2”: [“speaker_1”]
> “speaker_3”: []
> },
> “support information”:
> ‘‘‘
> -Take a short pause and wait for others’ comment.
> -During the pause, visually scan others.
> ’’’,
> “usefulness”: 0.9
> }speaker_2 Updated by the Feedback Enhancement Pipeline
> speaker_3 speaker_1

Figure 5: Demonstrative conversation episode used in the feedforward inference pipeline and subsequently updated through the feedback enhancement pipeline. 

consume the real-time generated conversational support, we em-pirically limit the output to no more than 50 words. Our iteratively refined 𝑃𝑇 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑒 also incorporates the types of information identified in Section 3 while participants were using PT2. 

## 4.3 Feedforward Inference Pipeline 

Real-time conversation support should draw on both verbal and nonverbal context to determine what information to surface and when ( DC1 , DC2 ). Interpreting these contextual signals, how-ever, is far from straightforward. ChatMuse addresses this challenge by actively maintaining and updating a group conversation context 

throughout the conversation (Figure 3a). This context is integrated into 𝑃𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑓 , which is then analyzed by the AI agent. The group conversation context captures both verbal and nonverbal behaviors of all participants throughout the entire con-versation. Unlike group conversations mediated by IM applications (Section 2), both verbal and nonverbal cues are essential in in-person group interactions ( DC2 ). Accordingly, ChatMuse incor-porates speaker , verbal speech , speech emotions , start and end times-tamp , and formation of attention for each conversation episode ,which is defined as the tracked contextual data while one partic-ipant is speaking (Figure 5). While we recognize the significance of other nonverbal cues, such as hand gestures [ 70 , 83 , 103 ] and f-formations [ 84 , 128 ], the current implementation of ChatMuse fo-cuses solely on incorporating attentional behaviors. Nevertheless, this represents a first step toward exploring agent-supported, MR-based in-person small-group conversation experiences, with fu-ture work aimed at integrating additional nonverbal behaviors. Although most of the contextual data in each conversation episode is straightforward, we describe how speech emotions and the for-mation of attention are captured and integrated into the group conversation context, and thereby 𝑃𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑓 .

• Inference of speech emotion. ChatMuse captures the raw audio data for each conversation episode, which is then used to infer the emotions expressed in the speech. We focus exclusively on the six basic emotions proposed by Ekman et al. , alongside the neutral emotion [ 34 , 35 ]. We use the pretrained speech emotion classification model [ 114 ], which achieves an overall accuracy of 

83 .79% on benchmark datasets. ChatMuse 

• Formation of attentions. Leveraging the tracked pose data of all conversational participants, we represent the formation of atten-tion as a directed graph, in which each conversational participant is modeled as a node, and the directed edges between nodes en-code the looking directions among participants. Each node may have zero inward edges, indicating that the corresponding partici-pant is not looked at by any other participant, or multiple inward edges, indicating that the participant is looked at by more than one participant during the associated utterance. This graph is then represented as a JSON object, where each key corresponds to a node mapped to a list of nodes that it is looked at by. Figure 5 illustrates an example of the formation of attention. For simplicity, we assume that a conversational participant ( e.g., speaker_1 ) is being looked at by another participant ( e.g., speaker_2 ) only when the horizontal angle between speaker_2 ’s gaze direction and the direction vector from speaker_2 to speaker_1 is less than 30 ◦.

## 4.4 Feedback Enhancement Pipeline 

While the feedforward inference pipeline relies solely on prior con-versational context, the feedback enhancement pipeline additionally leverages MR users’ nonverbal behaviors following the rendering of supporting information to improve future support generation (Figure 3b). To achieve this, ChatMuse estimates a usefulness score (𝑢 ) after rendering each supporting information, reflecting how effectively it assisted the MR user’s conversation experience. The estimated 

𝑢 and the associated generated supporting information are then updated in the corresponding conversation episode (Figure 5). While visual attention does not directly indicate usefulness, its allocation in task-driven contexts is heavily influenced by task rele-vance [ 33 ]. Gaze duration is commonly used as a proxy for visual attention, as longer viewing time reflects sustained attentional allo-cation to a stimulus [ 63 ]. We compute 𝑢 = 𝑡 𝑇 , where 𝑡 is the user’s gaze duration on the MR support overlay and 𝑇 is the expected read-ing time of the generated text. For simplicity, 𝑇 = 60 𝑁 𝑤𝑝𝑚 , where 𝑁 is the number of generated words, and 𝑤𝑝𝑚 is the typical adult read-ing speed. We set 𝑤𝑝𝑚 = 238 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠 /𝑚𝑖𝑛 based on empirical data on the silent reading speed of non-fiction texts for an adult [20]. 

## 4.5 Rendering Virtual Support Information 

Informed by DC3 , the rendered support information should re-main readable without occluding other conversation partners. To address this DC, we consider two scenarios. When the inferred support content explicitly mentions a specific conversation par-ticipant whom the supported user should refer to, the rendered support content is placed above that participant’s head. Otherwise, ChatMuse determines the placement based on the MR user’s gaze behavior. More specifically, when the MR user looks at another conversation participant, ChatMuse positions the virtual overlay above that participant’s head (Figure 6a). In contrast, when a par-ticipant does not look at their conversational partners, we simply place the overlay in front of the MR user along their gaze direction (Figure 6b). (b) (a) 

Figure 6: Placements of virtually rendered support within FPV when (a) the supported user is looking at one conversa-tion partner and (b) when the supported user is not. 

## 5 Evaluation 

We conducted within-subject studies, alongside focus groups, to understand the feasibility, utility, and usability of ChatMuse. More specifically, we aim to address three RQs: how does real-time conver-sational support information influence participants’ engagement and contributions during in-person small-group conversations? (RQ1) ,

how does the feedback enhancement pipeline affect ChatMuse’s abil-ity to support conversation participants? (RQ2) , and to what extent does the placement of the conversation supporting MR overlay provide support to conversation participants without causing distractions or occlusions? (RQ3) 

## 5.1 Participants and Procedures 

Participants. We recruited 18 participants (age, 𝑀 = 26 .1, 𝑆𝐷 =

4.0) and organized them into six groups: five groups of three and one group of four (Table 4, Appendix E). P18 withdrew from the study due to an unexpected event. As a result, one of the researchers served as the unsupported conversation participant, but did not participate in or influence the post-study focus group discussion. P# and G# are used to indicate Participants and participant Group. Participants wearing MR headset are highlighted by orange . All participants reported prior experience with AI tools, though their frequency of participation in group conversations varied. 

Tasks and conditions. Participants were first introduced to the study. In each group, one participant was assigned as the MR user, while the remaining participants served as conversation partners. Each group was then instructed to complete the training conversa-tion session, which allowed participants to become familiar with the study setting and the MR interface. The MR user was instructed to calibrate the eye tracking and all participants were asked to calibrate the tracking system at the start of each session. The participant group was then asked to complete three supporting conditions, with the order counterbalanced using a Latin square design [39]. 

• Baseline ( 𝐶 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 ). The MR user wore the headset during the conversation with only passthrough enabled, without ChatMuse’s support. This baseline condition allowed us to isolate the effect of wearing the MR headset. 

• Support without Feedback Enhancement ( 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 ). While the ChatMuse system was deployed in this supporting condition, the feedback enhancement pipeline was disabled. Zhou et al. 

• ChatMuse system with feedback enhancement ( 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 ).ChatMuse system was used in this condition. In this setup, both the feedforward inference pipeline and the feedback enhance-ment pipeline are employed to control and generate real-time conversational support. During each session, participant groups were directed to engage in discussions on three topics: (T1) how will AI affect future careers and the way people work ; (T2) if we were to travel to the Caribbean next winter break, where should we go ; (T3) what are the promising VR applications in the healthcare domain . These topics were iteratively selected by our team because they are open-ended and require a certain level of domain knowledge. Such topics could potentially in-troduce friction in group conversations. Each conversation session lasted around 15 min. After each session, participants were instructed to complete the NASA T ask Load Inde x (NASA TLX) [ 49 ] to evaluate their perceived workload. Participants wearing the MR headset were asked to complete an additional System Usability Scale (SUS) [ 19 ]questionnaire to assess their perceived usability. At the end of the sessions, MR users were asked to rate five statements (Q1–Q5) on a five-point Likert scale, while non-MR users rated only Q1–Q3. The statements for Q4 and Q5 did not reference a specific condition; instead, participants were prompted to reflect on either their first, second, or third session. We explicitly include the condition to improve readability. 

• Q1: “Having conversational support helps me better engage in and contribute to the group conversation.” 

• Q2: “Having conversational support makes me feel more over-whelmed.” 

• Q3: “The support information helps me recall prior points from our group conversation.” 

• Q4: “In terms of the usefulness of the suggestive content, 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 

is more helpful than 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 .” 

• Q5: “In terms of the proactivity, 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 is more helpful than 

𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 .” 

Finally, we conducted a focus group to gain a deeper understand-ing of participants’ experiences. 

## 5.2 Data Analysis 

We analyzed the responses from post-study questionnaires and the focus-group transcripts. The Friedman test was used to evaluate the quantitative questionnaire responses ( 𝛼 = .05 ) [ 41 ]. Thematic analysis [ 18 ] and deductive and inductive coding [ 36 ] were used to analyze qualitative data. RQs were used to establish the initial themes. Inductive coding [ 36 ] was used to analyze the support content and the rationales inferred by the AI agent. While our analysis primarily focused on qualitative data, we also computed three objective measures: 

• proactive rate of the AI agent. The proactive rate was computed as the ratio of decisions in which the agent determined it should provide support to the total number of agent invocations. 

• participation inequality , capturing the dispersion in contribu-tions. We first measured the % of total speaking time contributed by each participant. Participation inequality was then estimated as the standard deviation of these proportions. 

• support adoption score , measuring the extent to which MR users incorporated real-time support content. Support adoption score for a specific support information was approximated by the maxi-mum cosine similarity between the textual embeddings of the ex-ample speech and the utterances produced by the ChatMuse user prior to the subsequent support content being rendered. Pre-trained sentence transformer all-MiniLM-L6-v2 was used to encode textual semantics [ 110 , 121 ]. We employed Tau-U analysis (𝛼 = .05 ) [ 108 ] to evaluate the non-overlap in support adoption scores between 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 and 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 .

## 5.3 Results 

Our results were organized across the three RQs. Our findings were further grounded in the analysis of 209 and 271 textual rationales generated by 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 and 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 . Table 1 reports the partic-ipation inequality and support adoption scores for each group. To improve readability, we used gray to highlight participants’ testi-monies and blue to highlight agent-inferred support content and accompanying textual rationales. Appendix F presents the SUS and NASA TLX scores. 

How does ChatMuse influence participants’ engagement and contributions? (RQ1) 

Most participants valued the usefulness of proactive conversa-tion support in assisting their participation in group discussions. Most participants viewed ChatMuse as an “assistive tool or assistive agent” ( P17 ) for small-group conversation. Although no signifi-cant differences were observed in the SUS and NASA TLX responses, the benefits were reflected in the responses of Q1 (Figure 7a–b). 

What key benefits does ChatMuse’s support provide? Overall, we identified seven themes representing the key benefits: reduced conversational friction (P5, P7 , P11 ), support in providing summarized context ( P4 ), access of essential background in-formation ( P7 ), support in starting a new topic ( P7 , P17 ), 

emphasizing the context of the conversation ( P17 ), assis-tance in extending current discussion topics ( P14 ), and serv-ing as the source of inspirations ( P14 ). For example, P1 ap-preciated the possible speech generated by ChatMuse that he could use in conversation: “the example line is helpful [...] it was giving me instructions regarding what to engage and that kind of stuff too [...] It was helpful!” The focus group of G3 highlighted benefits such as reducing conversational friction and using the system as an icebreaker. P7 pointed out: “the supports not only help me to initiate the conversation and a new topic, but also probe the critical background.” After P9 remarked: “the conversation flowed well, and I gained many ideas about healthcare,” P7 immediately noted: “but I was the one who started it, right? Otherwise we would have all been stuck.” Some participants also highlighted the usefulness of providing additional background information. Examples include: “I think it’s pretty good in the last session because I don’t know much about healthcare, and the suggestions provided were useful” ( P1 ); and “I didn’t have a lot of knowledge in [T2]. So it was helping kind of provide topics to talk about” ( P4 ). P14 emphasized the value of using the provided background to extend the argument: “[the support] can be useful to help me extend my perspective. For example, for T2, while I know a few things about the Caribbean, like the cruise, ChatMuse Q1                      

> Strongly Disagree Disagree Neither Agree Nor Disagree Agree Strongly Agree
> (a)
> Q2
> Q3
> Q4
> Q5
> Q1
> Q2
> Q3
> Participant Count Participant Count
> (b)
> 15
> 141
> 141
> 1131
> 123
> 1173
> 525
> 291

Figure 7: Post-study survey responses from (a) MR users and (b) non-MR users. 

it provides me with some examples to help me start the conversation, and try to get everyone involved.” Further, participants also high-lighted the benefits when AI-generated support serves as the source of inspiration: “But when I try to get deeper and try to talk more about some specific area, I really appreciate the clues which get to inspire me to give me more cues and options” ( P14 ). Finally, some participants appreciated the potential benefit of having access to a conversation summary: “I really appreciate the summary at the end because sometimes I’ll just be talking and I don’t remember what we just talked” ( P17 ). 

How is the proactive support perceived? Participants valued the proactive support offered by ChatMuse, but differed in how often they wanted it to be provided. Example include: “[the support] up-dates by itself, it’s far good [...] the conversation flew very nicely, mostly because of the automatically pop-up support actually” ( P7 ); and “it was helpful that the suggestions could automatically update based on our conversation” ( P11 ). A few participants, however, noted that the timing of rendering the support content could be fur-ther improved. P1 believed that “sometimes, the support message keeps changing too frequently,” although P14 thought “[frequently update of the support] doesn’t matter because I have some word in my mind. With the suggestion, I am just trying to find a good time to cut it in.” On the contrary, P7 mentioned that “at some points, I was very worried why [the support] is not coming.” Our analy-sis of the AI-generated support content reveals proactive rates of 

87 .98% (𝑆𝐷 = 8.57% ) for 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 and 89 .91% (𝑆𝐷 = 6.83% ) for 

𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 . We observed that the AI agent often chose not to provide support to avoid disrupting other participants’ thought processes (e.g., “P15 has taken the floor and is introducing a new point about Upwork. It is appropriate to listen and wait before contributing fur-ther, so no support is needed at this moment” ) (G5, 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 ), to prevent intervening when the MR user was not actively needed in the conversation ( e.g., “P8 is currently speaking and responding to P7 ’s question, so it is appropriate for P7 to listen and wait for P8 to finish before contributing further” ) (G2, 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 ), when the MR user is over active ( e.g., “ P14 has just provided a thorough and wide-ranging answer, and another participant has complimented the comprehensiveness. No immediate support is needed as P14 is ac-tively engaged and has completed its contribution” ) (G4, 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 ), and when a participant was attempting to summarize the discussion (e.g., “P19 is currently summarizing the conversation, and P17 has already provided a comprehensive summary. No additional support is needed at this moment for P17 to engage or contribute further” ) (G6, 

𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 ). 

How is ChatMuse’s support used? Our analysis revealed that participants expressed diverse perspectives on the overall perceived usefulness of the support, the content of the textual support, and the ways in which the support was used. Participants reported mixed experiences with the content supported by AI. Most MR users found the support information helpful. For example, P14 explained: “the current support is very good because I have full options. I can just choose whether to read it or just use some keywords from the instructions. If I was wrong, I can just use the full instruction again and try to change the subject, try to correct it, and then just express again.” 

However, a few participants identified areas for improvement. P4 mentioned experiencing some cognitive load when reading the support content and converting it into her own words: “when I see the support, I found that I need to kind of translate it into my own way [...] I think maybe just making a bullet point of related topics - that would be much more helpful!” P1 suggested improving the system by making the supporting text more concise: “I can read the text better if it’s shorter.” However, P17 believed that “since it’s more of something that I can just receive and choose to either read off of or choose to dismiss, it’s more than welcome to appear.” P14 appreciated the usefulness of suggestions related to nonverbal cues, although he noted that he did not always follow these suggestions in practice: “my style to express myself is to have some body language, not as facial expressions [...] So basically [the support] just reminds me to get them [refer to other participants] into this discussion.” 

When asked about the performance of supported participants during the experimental conversation, most non-MR users reported that they “could barely tell the difference” (P19). However, these participants, in some contexts, described the MR users as the “pre-senter” (P5), “leading role” (P6), “narrator” (P8), as well as being 

“artificial while transitioning topics” (P13), “giving a speech” (P16), and “less genuine” (P16). A few participants were concerned that the support content may significantly alter the flow of the group con-versation. In the focus group of G4, non-MR participants reflected their experience during the discussion of T3: “you were talking about places like Cuba [...] And he [ P11 ] just says that the Bahamas is really sunny and nice” (P13); meanwhile, P12 followed up “it was trying to like veer back from going off topic, but I think the way it did that was like very sudden.” 

How does feedback enhancement pipeline affect ChatMuse’s ability to support conversation participants? (RQ2) 

Our findings demonstrate how the feedback enhancement pipeline influences the dynamics of group conversation and shapes partici-pants’ perceptions of the supported experience. Table 1 shows a reduction in participation inequality across all groups for 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 compared to 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 . Significant Tau-U effects ( 𝑝 < .05 ) for G3–G6 showed an increase in support adoption scores when feedback was provided. Q4 and Q5 in Figure 7 summarize participants’ post-study sur-vey responses regarding the usefulness of suggestive content and helpfulness of the proactive support. P7 and P11 responded pos-itively 2, preferring 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 over 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 in terms of both the    

> 2We consider a response as positive when the participant selects agree or strongly agree in Figure 7. Zhou et al.

Table 1: Participation inequality and support adoption score for each participant group. Significant Tau-U indices ( 𝑝 < .05 )are highlighted in green ; non-significant in red . Group                                                             

> ID
> Participation Inequality (%) Support Adoption Score
> 𝑪 𝑩𝒂𝒔𝒆𝒍𝒊𝒏𝒆 𝑪 𝑵𝒐𝑭𝒆𝒆𝒅𝒃𝒂𝒄𝒌 𝑪 𝑪𝒉𝒂𝒕𝑴𝒖𝒔𝒆 𝑪 𝑵𝒐𝑭𝒆𝒆𝒅𝒃𝒂𝒄𝒌 𝑪 𝑪𝒉𝒂𝒕𝑴𝒖𝒔𝒆 Tau -U Index
> G1 14.38 18.18 6.53 0.24 ( 𝑆𝐷 =0.18) 0.31 ( 𝑆𝐷 =0.18) 𝜏 =.21, 𝑝 =.061
> G2 22.04 16.33 4.42 0.36 (𝑆𝐷 =0.26) 0.42 (𝑆𝐷 =0.21) 𝜏 =.16, 𝑝 =.308
> G3 15.39 14.93 6.35 0.35 (𝑆𝐷 =0.16) 0.50 (𝑆𝐷 =0.21) 𝜏 =.55, 𝑝 =.008
> G4 12.88 16.51 2.80 0.41 (𝑆𝐷 =0.38) 0.45 (𝑆𝐷 =0.16) 𝜏 =.41, 𝑝 <.001
> G5 20.52 31.43 7.96 0.46 (𝑆𝐷 =0.25) 0.53 (𝑆𝐷 =0.30) 𝜏 =.35, 𝑝 =.017
> G6 19.55 8.79 8.59 0.47 (𝑆𝐷 =0.22) 0.61 (𝑆𝐷 =0.19) 𝜏 =.49, 𝑝 <.001

usefulness of the suggested content and the proactivity in present-ing it. Although P1 neither agreed nor disagreed with Q4 and Q5, he remarked: “[ 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 ] seems to provide more information.” 

While disagreed with both Q4 and Q5, P4 explained her experi-ence: “in [ 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 ], I think what it was at was very centered on one point that was made, whereas [for 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 ], it offered differ-ent information like variety.” On the other hand, the majority of participants did not perceive a difference between 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 and 

𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 conditions. Analysis of the rationales inferred by the AI agent suggested that the feedback enhancement pipeline improved the conversa-tional grounding of the generated support. In 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 , rationales were frequently tied to what a participant had just said or done in the conversation. For example, ChatMuse reasoned that “ P4 ex-pressed uncertainty about Aruba’s location” (G2), “P8 just contributed a thoughtful example” (G3), or “P12 is questioning the use of VR for phobia treatment” (G4), and then generated support tailored to those specific moments. ChatMuse also reflected on whether a prior support strategy had been useful. For example, one rationale stated, “Prior support with facts was useful, so a similar approach is warranted” (G4), showing that ChatMuse used earlier interaction feedback to justify a follow-up intervention with similar approach. In contrast, rationales in 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 condition tended to be framed at the broader topic level, such as “the conversation is focused on safe and stable Caribbean destinations” (G1), or “the conversation is focused on AI’s impact on education and training” (G2), which simply helped keep the conversation going or broaden the current topic. 

Placement of the rendered conversation support (RQ3). Most participants were satisfied with how the conversation support was displayed ( e.g., “if I’m looking at him, the box is right there!” ( P1 )). For non-MR users, most participants reported that they were un-able to perceive the diverse and unexpected behavioral gestures of participants wearing the MR headset, for example, “I didn’t feel that he was making any odd head movements” (P15). However, a few participants wearing MR headset pointed out the limitations of the rendered textual support when it cannot keep pace with rapid changes of attention. P7 and P14 noted the drawback when the supporting text lagged behind the dynamic gestural behaviors. For example, “when I start looking at [P9] while speaking, [the support] would be here [...] I really want to look at him [...] So if it actually moves on him with a transparent view, it’d be very good!” ( P7 ). Although G2 did not encounter this situation, P7 anticipated a more complex scenario when “two [or more] people are talking.” 

## 6 Discussion 6.1 Practical Implications 

Our research around ChatMuse shows a first design exploration of a new MR-based conversational support. We discuss how our find-ings inform the design of future MR conversational support agents by incorporating richer contextual information and innovating strategies to preserve conversational ownership while providing on-the-fly in-situ support. We then discuss how ChatMuse can be potentially integrated into a broader range of applications and support diverse user populations. 

Supporting conversations through the careful integration of richer contexts. We demonstrate the effectiveness of Chat-Muse in supporting group conversations by reducing a variety of conversational frictions, providing summaries, and aiding in the recall of prior context, as well as offering additional background information and topic suggestions. However, participants also em-phasized the importance of incorporating richer conversational context and designing more personalized support. For example, ChatMuse could construct a user profile that represents the sup-ported individual’s personas. Incorporating these personas may enable ChatMuse to adapt its output based on the user’s personality and prior knowledge; for example, a lower level of proactive support may be provided to users with greater knowledge of the discussion topic, while more support for gestural behaviors could be designed for users with less developed interpersonal communication skills. 

Conversation ownership. Support from ChatMuse should act as a conversational assistant rather than a script for the user to simply read. The role of ChatMuse is to help users stay engaged, notice possible entry points, and sustain the interpersonal rela-tionship with partners, while leaving the final decision of what to say and how to say it to the user. While our research around ChatMuse explored a new MR-based supporting technique for in-person small-group conversation, our findings revealed distinct perspectives from ChatMuse users regarding the perception of ren-dered content, the timing of textual support delivery, and the use of ChatMuse-generated support. While most participants believed that ChatMuse could support their conversational experience, a few ( e.g., P4 ) felt overwhelmed at certain moments. Our findings suggest that a consistent level of agency may not be suitable for all ChatMuse users; the agent’s level of agency may need to be dynam-ically adapted based on the evolving context and different stages of group conversation. With ChatMuse, a natural next step is to examine how AI-mediated group conversations shape users’ sense of ownership, drawing on the construct of locus of control and pref-erence of agency that captures individuals’ perceived agency over events [ 22 , 111 , 115 ]. Although the locus of control of AI agents has been studied in other AI-mediated tasks such as writing [ 42 , 59 ], it remains underexplored in our group conversation context. Future designs of ChatMuse may consider enabling the AI agent to as-sess the cognitive load of all conversation participants, potentially measured through gaze patterns [119] and pupil dilation [46]. 

Integration with a broader range of applications and users. 

We demonstrate the effectiveness of ChatMuse in supporting in-person small-group conversations. While the study examines sce-narios involving three to four participants across three designated ChatMuse 

topics, its practical implications extend to a wider range of applica-tions and user contexts. Our study can be generalized to broader real-world group conversation scenarios. For example, ChatMuse can support individuals with verbal communication challenges or expe-riences of social withdrawal in more effectively engaging in small-group conversations [ 112 ]. In educational settings, ChatMuse may be applied in active learning classrooms, where small-group discus-sions are considered a critical component [ 65 , 129 ]. ChatMuse may be valuable for general and domain-specific knowledge workers. For example, “I would love to use it for supporting research discussions with my colleagues” (P3), and “I’m doing senior design, ideas that were just spitballing and just coming up with like on the fly [...] I think that [ChatMuse] would definitely be helpful to be used in such a group discussion!” ( P17 ). 

## 6.2 Limitation and Future Work 

We summarize our limitations in six aspects. 

System constraints. We first acknowledge that our study does not fully capture the authentic experience of conversation part-ners, as the bulky headset form factor and relatively low-quality video passthrough of the Meta Quest Pro [ 56 ] can obscure the supported user’s eyes and upper facial expressions. Although our primary focus is the experience of the ChatMuse user, the experi-ences of conversation partners can, in turn, affect the supported user’s experience. We chose the Meta Quest Pro [ 56 ] for its built-in eye-tracking capabilities and ease of prototyping. We believe that 

𝐶 𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 can isolate confounds introduced by the headset. Future work may investigate the usability and utility of ChatMuse when being integrated on lightweight AR glasses, which may provide con-versation partners with greater visual access of the eye and facial expressions of the supported user. Second, the existing Orbbec cam-era [ 105 ] limits nonverbal behavior capture fidelity; more precise motion capture setup like OptiTrack [5] could improve reliability. 

Interaction design and rendering of support. Our current inter-action design is not optimal. The current design of textual support overlays may create visual distractions of the MR user. Future work may extend ChatMuse by incorporating the design of prior MR no-tifications [ 21 , 60 , 85 ] research, while optimizing the placement and content of the rendered MR textual overlays. While ChatMuse cur-rently uses a rule-based approach to determine the placement of textual support (Section 4.5), future work may investigate how Chat-Muse may integrate the design of context-aware [ 38 ] placement algorithms based on constrained optimization [ 23 , 26 , 32 , 73 , 78 , 99 ]so that the placements of MR support can better adapt computa-tionally to the complex dynamics of group conversations. 

Risk of excessive agency. The MR textual support dynamically rendered by ChatMuse may introduce agency risks if users interpret the suggestions as directives to follow rather than information to consider, as reported by some participants. While this limitation has been discussed in Section 6.1, future work may further explore the impact related to the locus of agency; an improved ChatMuse should generate and render support that allows ChatMuse to preserve conversation ownership while offering useful assistance. Following this direction, future work may also explore how the level of agency can be adapted to the ChatMuse user over extended periods of use. 

Richer nonverbal behavior understanding. The current im-plementation of ChatMuse only considers speech emotion and attention formation, with tracked headpose direction serving as a proxy for non-MR users’ gaze, which may not precisely corre-spond to actual gaze direction. Future work could incorporate a broader range of nonverbal signals from all conversation partici-pants, e.g., hand gestures and f-formations [ 66 , 67 ], enabling the agent to interpret implicit social cues and provide more nuanced conversational support. Future work may also explore the integra-tion of diverse sensing modalities, e.g., [ 6 , 7, 15 , 24 ], to enhance the contextual awareness of ChatMuse. 

Scalability to longer conversations. Our experimental group conversations last around 15 min; longer conversations are out of our scope. It remains unclear how effectively ChatMuse can support lengthy conversations lasting several hours or how well the agent can retain key points throughout extended interactions. Future work could employ more advanced memory mechanisms within AI agents ( e.g., [ 54 , 82 ]) to maintain coherent, long-term conversational support. 

Study. Our study involved six participant groups totaling 18 partic-ipants, with findings primarily grounded in qualitative data. Future work could include a larger and more diverse participant pool en-compassing a wider range of backgrounds ( e.g., personality, topic familiarity, and communication skills), as well as evaluate Chat-Muse with domain-specific discussion topics and collaborative ac-tivities involving complicated joint tasks. 

## 7 Conclusion 

ChatMuse is a novel MR-based proactive assistive AI agent system for in-person small-group conversation experience. Our within-subject studies alongside focus groups with six participant groups (𝑁 = 18 ) revealed seven key benefits that ChatMuse provides in supporting users’ engagement and contribution to in-person small-group conversations. Our findings also highlight directions for future improvements to ChatMuse and for MR support in in-person group conversations. 

## Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the startup grant provided by Florida 

International University (FIU) and the facilities provided by FIU’s iCAVE [ 40 ]. We thank the reviewers and our shepherd for their valuable feedback. We thank Ariana Taglioretti, Jennifer Large, Theodore Atis, and Steve Luis for their assistance with study lo-gistics. We thank Pedro Remior and Nirmala Arunachalam for their valuable brainstorming support. We appreciate the early-stage brainstorming contributions of the FIU Capstone II students, 

incl. Peace Passos, Ana Morales, Jonathan Marinez, Sabrina Al-varado, and Karen Rivera. Zhou et al. 

## References 

[1] 2002. Interpersonal-Communication-Skills-Inventory . http://fac-staff.seattleu. edu/thompson/web/communication/communication_skills_inventory.pdf Ac-cessed on January 8, 2026. [2] 2024. GPT 4.1 . https://openai.com/index/gpt-4-1 Accessed on March 16, 2026. [3] 2024. GPT-4o-mini . https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-4o-mini Accessed on January 21, 2026. [4] 2026. GPT-Live . https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-live/ Accessed on July 14, 2026. [5] 2026. OptiTrack . https://optitrack.com Accessed on March 18, 2026. [6] Yuvraj Agarwal, Christopher Harrison, Gierad Laput, Sudershan Boovaragha-van, Chen Chen, Abhijit Hota, Bo Robert Xiao, and Yang Zhang. 2019. Virtual Sensor System. https://patents.google.com/patent/US20200033163A1/en US Patent 10436615. [7] Yuvraj Agarwal, Christopher Harrison, Gierad Laput, Sudershan Boovaragha-van, Chen Chen, Abhijit Hota, Bo Robert Xiao, and Yang Zhang. 2020. Virtual Sensor System. https://patents.google.com/patent/US20200033163A1/en US Patent Application 16591987. [8] James F. Allen, Curry I. Guinn, and Eric Horvtz. 1999. Mixed-Initiative In-teraction. IEEE Intelligent Systems and their Applications 14, 5 (1999), 14–23. https://doi.org/10.1109/5254.796083 [9] Sumit Asthana, Sagi Hilleli, Pengcheng He, and Aaron Halfaker. 2025. Sum-maries, Highlights, and Action Items: Design, Implementation and Evaluation of an LLM-Powered Meeting Recap System. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 9, 2 (may 2025), 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3711074 [10] Robert F Bales. 1950. Interaction Process Analysis: A Method for the Study of Small Groups. (1950). https://doi.org/10.2307/2572427 [11] Jad Bendarkawi, Ashley Ponce, Sean Chidozie Mata, Aminah Aliu, Yuhan Liu, Lei Zhang, Amna Liaqat, Varun Nagaraj Rao, and Andrés Monroy-Hernández. 2025. ConversAR: Exploring Embodied LLM-Powered Group Conversations in Augmented Reality for Second Language Learners. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 153, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706599.3720162 [12] Indrani Bhattacharya, Michael Foley, Ni Zhang, Tongtao Zhang, Christine Ku, Cameron Mine, Heng Ji, Christoph Riedl, Brooke Foucault Welles, and Richard J. Radke. 2018. A Multimodal-Sensor-Enabled Room for Unobtrusive Group Meet-ing Analysis. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Multi-modal Interaction (Boulder, CO, USA) (ICMI ’18) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 347–355. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242969.3243022 [13] Millard J Bienvenu Sr. 1971. An Interpersonal Communication Inventory. Jour-nal of communication 21, 4 (1971), 381–388. https://doi.org/j.1460-2466.1971. tb02937.x [14] Laurens Boer and Jared Donovan. 2012. Provotypes for Participatory Innovation. In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom) (DIS ’12) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 388–397. https://doi.org/10.1145/2317956.2318014 [15] Sudershan Boovaraghavan, Chen Chen, Anurag Maravi, Mike Czapik, Yang Zhang, Chris Harrison, and Yuvraj Agarwal. 2023. Mites: Design and Deploy-ment of a General-Purpose Sensing Infrastructure for Buildings. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 7, 1, Article 2 (mar 2023), 32 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3580865 [16] Lenore A Boyd and Arthur J Roach. 1977. Interpersonal Communication Skills Differentiating More Satisfying From Less Satisfying Marital Relationships. 

Journal of Counseling Psychology 24, 6 (1977), 540. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0167.24.6.540 [17] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using Thematic Analysis in Psy-chology. Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101. https: //doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa [18] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2012. Thematic Analysis . American Psy-chological Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/13620-004 [19] John Brooke. 1996. SUS - A Quick and Dirty Usability Scale. Usability Evaluation in Industry 189, 194 (1996), 4–7. [20] Marc Brysbaert. 2019. How Many Words Do We Read Per Minute? A Review and Meta-Analysis of Reading Rate. Journal of memory and language 109 (2019), 104047. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2019.104047 [21] Runze Cai, Nuwan Nanayakkarawasam Peru Kandage Janaka, Shengdong Zhao, and Minghui Sun. 2023. ParaGlassMenu: Towards Social-Friendly Subtle In-teractions in Conversations. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Hu-man Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Associa-tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 721, 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581065 [22] Marco Caliendo, Deborah A Cobb-Clark, Juliana Silva-Goncalves, and Arne Uhlendorff. 2024. Locus of Control and the Preference for Agency. European Economic Review 165 (2024), 104737. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2024. 104737 [23] Chen Chen, Cuong Nguyen, Jane Hoffswell, Jennifer Healey, Trung Bui, and Nadir Weibel. 2023. PaperToPlace: Transforming Instruction Documents into Spatialized and Context-Aware Mixed Reality Experiences. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (San Francisco, CA, USA) (UIST ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 118, 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606832 [24] Chen Chen, Ke Sun, and Xinyu Zhang. 2020. CapTag: Toward Printable Ubiq-uitous Internet of Things: Poster Abstract. In Proceedings of the 18th Confer-ence on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (Virtual Event, Japan) (SenSys ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 669–670. https://doi.org/10.1145/3384419.3430410 [25] Xinyue Chen, Lev Tankelevitch, Rishi Vanukuru, Ava Elizabeth Scott, Payod Panda, and Sean Rintel. 2025. Are We On Track? AI-Assisted Active and Passive Goal Reflection During Meetings. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 705, 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3706598.3714052 [26] Yifei Cheng, Yukang Yan, Xin Yi, Yuanchun Shi, and David Lindlbauer. 2021. SemanticAdapt: Optimization-Based Adaptation of Mixed Reality Layouts Lever-aging Virtual-Physical Semantic Connections. In The 34th Annual ACM Sympo-sium on User Interface Software and Technology (Virtual Event, USA) (UIST ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 282–297. https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474750 [27] Jun-Ho Choi, Marios Constantinides, Sagar Joglekar, and Daniele Quercia. 2021. KAIROS: Talking Heads and Moving Bodies for Successful Meetings. In Pro-ceedings of the 22nd International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications (Virtual, United Kingdom) (HotMobile ’21) . Association for Com-puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 30–36. https://doi.org/10.1145/3446382. 3448361 [28] Marios Constantinides, Sanja Šćepanović, Daniele Quercia, Hongwei Li, Ugo Sassi, and Michael Eggleston. 2020. ComFeel: Productivity is a Matter of the Senses Too. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 4, 4, Article 123 (dec 2020), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3432234 [29] Gus Cooney, Adam M Mastroianni, Nicole Abi-Esber, and Alison Wood Brooks. 2020. The Many Minds Problem: Disclosure in Dyadic Versus Group Conversa-tion. Current Opinion in Psychology 31 (2020), 22–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. copsyc.2019.06.032 [30] Richard L. Daft and Robert H. Lengel. 1986. Organizational Information Re-quirements, Media Richness and Structural Design. Manage. Sci. 32, 5 (May 1986), 554–571. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.32.5.554 [31] Ionut Damian, Chiew Seng (Sean) Tan, Tobias Baur, Johannes Schöning, Kris Luyten, and Elisabeth André. 2015. Augmenting Social Interactions: Realtime Behavioural Feedback using Social Signal Processing Techniques. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Seoul, Republic of Korea) (CHI ’15) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 565–574. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702314 [32] Shakiba Davari and Doug A. Bowman. 2024. Towards Context-Aware Adap-tation in Extended Reality: A Design Space for XR Interfaces and an Adap-tive Placement Strategy. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2411.02607 (2024). https: //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.02607 [33] Andrew T. Duchowski. 2017. Eye Tracking Methodology . Springer International Publishing, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57883-5 [34] Paul Ekman. 1992. Are There Basic Emotions? Psychological Review 99, 3 (1992), 550–553. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.99.3.550 [35] Paul Ekman and Wallace V Friesen. 1971. Constants Across Cultures in the Face and Emotion. Journal of personality and social psychology 17, 2 (1971), 124. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0030377 [36] Satu Elo and Helvi Kyngäs. 2008. The Qualitative Content Analysis Process. 

Journal of Advanced Nursing 62, 1 (2008), 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 1365-2648.2007.04569.x [37] Sayed M Elsayed-Elkhouly, Harold Lazarus, and Volville Forsythe. 1997. Why is a Third of Your Time Wasted in Meetings? Journal of Management Development 

16, 9 (1997), 672–676. https://doi.org/10.1108/02621719710190185 [38] Gerhard Fischer. 2012. Context-Aware Systems: The ‘Right’ Information, at the ‘Right’ Time, in the ‘Right’ Place, in the ‘Right’ Way, to the ‘Right’ Person. In 

Proceedings of the International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces 

(Capri Island, Italy) (AVI ’12) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 287–294. https://doi.org/10.1145/2254556.2254611 [39] Ronald Aylmer Fisher. 1950. Statistical Methods for Research Workers . Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh. xv + 354 pp. pages. Issue llth ed. revised. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/139737d0 [40] Florida International University (FIU). 2025. FIU-ICAVE: Integrated Computer Augmented Virtual Environment . https://icave.fiu.edu/ Accessed on December 3, 2025. [41] Milton Friedman. 1937. The Use of Ranks to Avoid the Assumption of Normality Implicit in the Analysis of Variance. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 32, 200 (1937), 675– 701. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1937.10503522 [42] Jenny Xiyu Fu, Brennan Antone, Kowe Kadoma, and Malte Jung. 2025. Large Language Model Use Impact Locus of Control. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2505.11406 ChatMuse 

(2025). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.11406 [43] Szu-Wei Fu, Yaran Fan, Yasaman Hosseinkashi, Jayant Gupchup, and Ross Cutler. 2022. Improving Meeting Inclusiveness Using Speech Interruption Analysis. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia (Lisboa, Portugal) (MM ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 887–895. https://doi.org/10.1145/3503161.3548379 [44] Yuichiro Fujimoto. 2025. ChatAR: Conversation Support using Large Language Model and Augmented Reality. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2506.16008 (2025). https: //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.16008 [45] Daniel Gatica-Perez. 2006. Analyzing Group Interactions in Conversations: A Review. In 2006 IEEE International Conference on Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems . 41–46. https://doi.org/10.1109/MFI.2006. 265658 [46] Rahul Gavas, Debatri Chatterjee, and Aniruddha Sinha. 2017. Estimation of Cognitive Load Based on the Pupil Size Dilation. In 2017 IEEE international conference on systems, man, and cybernetics (SMC) . IEEE, 1499–1504. https: //doi.org/10.1109/SMC.2017.8122826 [47] Zixuan Guo and Tomoo Inoue. 2019. Using a Conversational Agent to Facili-tate Non-Native Speaker’s Active Participation in Conversation. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI EA ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3313075 [48] Ki-Won Haan, Christoph Riedl, and Anita Woolley. 2021. Discovering Where We Excel: How Inclusive Turn-Taking in Conversation Improves Team Per-formance. In Companion Publication of the 2021 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (Montreal, QC, Canada) (ICMI ’21 Companion) . As-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 278–283. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3461615.3485417 [49] Sandra G. Hart and Lowell E. Staveland. 1988. Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of Empirical and Theoretical Research. In Human Mental Workload , Peter A. Hancock and Najmedin Meshkati (Eds.). Advances in Psychology, Vol. 52. North-Holland, 139–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62386-9 [50] Uri Hasson, Asif A Ghazanfar, Bruno Galantucci, Simon Garrod, and Christian Keysers. 2012. Brain-to-Brain Coupling: A Mechanism for Creating and Sharing a Social World. Trends in cognitive sciences 16, 2 (2012), 114–121. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.007 [51] Jess Hohenstein and Malte Jung. 2018. AI-Supported Messaging: An Inves-tigation of Human-Human Text Conversation with AI Support. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI EA ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188487 [52] Eric Horvitz. 1999. Principles of Mixed-Initiative User Interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA) (CHI ’99) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 159–166. https://doi.org/10.1145/302979.303030 [53] Stephanie Houde, Kristina Brimijoin, Michael Muller, Steven I. Ross, Dario An-dres Silva Moran, Gabriel Enrique Gonzalez, Siya Kunde, Morgan A. Foreman, and Justin D. Weisz. 2025. Controlling AI Agent Participation in Group Conver-sations: A Human-Centered Approach. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’25) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 390–408. https://doi.org/10.1145/3708359.3712089 [54] Wei-Chieh Huang, Weizhi Zhang, Yueqing Liang, Yuanchen Bei, Yankai Chen, Tao Feng, Xinyu Pan, Zhen Tan, Yu Wang, Tianxin Wei, Shanglin Wu, Ruiyao Xu, Liangwei Yang, Rui Yang, Wooseong Yang, Chin-Yuan Yeh, Hanrong Zhang, Haozhen Zhang, Siqi Zhu, Henry Peng Zou, Wanjia Zhao, Song Wang, Wu-jiang Xu, Zixuan Ke, Zheng Hui, Dawei Li, Yaozu Wu, Langzhou He, Chen Wang, Xiongxiao Xu, Baixiang Huang, Juntao Tan, Shelby Heinecke, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, Ahmed A. Metwally, Jun Yan, Chen-Yu Lee, Hanqing Zeng, Yinglong Xia, Xiaokai Wei, Ali Payani, Yu Wang, Haitong Ma, Wenya Wang, Chenguang Wang, Yu Zhang, Xin Wang, Yongfeng Zhang, Jiaxuan You, Hanghang Tong, Xiao Luo, Xue Liu, Yizhou Sun, Wei Wang, Julian McAuley, James Zou, Jiawei Han, Philip S. Yu, and Kai Shu. 2026. Rethinking Memory Mechanisms of Foundation Agents in the Second Half: A Survey. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2602.06052 (2026). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.06052 [55] Meta Inc. 2023. Learn about Eye Tracking on Meta Quest Pro . https://www.meta. com/help/quest/8107387169303764 Accessed on February 18, 2026. [56] Meta Inc. 2023. Meta Quest Pro . https://www.meta.com/quest/quest-pro Ac-cessed on October 9, 2025. [57] Meta Inc. 2024. Meta Quest 3S . https://www.meta.com/quest/quest-3s Accessed on January 18, 2026. [58] Shivesh Jadon, Mehrad Faridan, Edward Mah, Rajan Vaish, Wesley Willett, and Ryo Suzuki. 2024. Augmented Conversation with Embedded Speech-Driven On-the-Fly Referencing in AR. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2405.18537 (2024). https: //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.18537 [59] Maurice Jakesch, Advait Bhat, Daniel Buschek, Lior Zalmanson, and Mor Naa-man. 2023. Co-Writing with Opinionated Language Models Affects Users’ Views. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 111, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548. 3581196 [60] Nuwan Janaka, Chloe Haigh, Hyeongcheol Kim, Shan Zhang, and Sheng-dong Zhao. 2022. Paracentral and Near-Peripheral Visualizations: Towards Attention-Maintaining Secondary Information Presentation on OHMDs Dur-ing In-Person Social Interactions. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 551, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502127 [61] Sumit Jha and Carlos Busso. 2016. Analyzing the Relationship between Head Pose and Gaze to Model Driver Visual Attention. In 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) . 2157–2162. https: //doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2016.7795905 [62] Janet G. Johnson, Macarena Peralta, Mansanjam Kaur, Ruijie Sophia Huang, Sheng Zhao, Ruijia Guan, Shwetha Rajaram, and Michael Nebeling. 2025. Ex-ploring Collaborative GenAI Agents in Synchronous Group Settings: Elic-iting Team Perceptions and Design Considerations for the Future of Work. 

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 9, 7, Article CSCW414 (oct 2025), 33 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3757595 [63] Marcel A. Just and Patricia A. Carpenter. 1980. A Theory of Reading: From Eye Fixations to Comprehension. Psychological Review 87, 4 (1980), 329–354. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.87.4.329 [64] Vaiva Kalnikaitundefined, Patrick Ehlen, and Steve Whittaker. 2012. Markup as You Talk: Establishing Effective Memory Cues While Still Contributing to a Meeting. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (Seattle, Washington, USA) (CSCW ’12) . Association for Com-puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 349–358. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 2145204.2145260 [65] Carolyn M Keeler and R Kirk Steinhorst. 1995. Using Small Groups to Promote Active Learning in the Introductory Statistics Course: A Report from the Field. 

Journal of Statistics Education 3, 2 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1080/10691898.1995. 11910485 [66] Adam Kendon. 1990. Conducting Interaction: Patterns of Behavior in Focused Encounters . Vol. 7. CUP Archive. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263100011700 [67] Adam Kendon. 1990. Spatial Organization in Social Encounters: The F-Formation System. Conducting interaction: Patterns of behavior in focused encounters (1990). [68] Soomin Kim, Jinsu Eun, Changhoon Oh, Bongwon Suh, and Joonhwan Lee. 2020. Bot in the Bunch: Facilitating Group Chat Discussion by Improving Efficiency and Participation with a Chatbot. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376785 [69] Steffi Kohl, André Calero Valdez, and Kay Schröder. 2023. Using Speech Con-tribution Visualization to Improve Team Performance of Divergent Thinking Tasks. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Creativity and Cognition (Virtual Event, USA) (C&C ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 319–324. https://doi.org/10.1145/3591196.3596824 [70] Robert M Krauss, Robert A Dushay, Yihsiu Chen, and Frances Rauscher. 1995. The Communicative Value of Conversational Hand Gesture. Journal of exper-imental social psychology 31, 6 (1995), 533–552. https://doi.org/10.1006/jesp. 1995.1024 [71] Robert E Kraut, Robert S Fish, Robert W Root, Barbara L Chalfonte, et al . 1990. Informal Communication in Organizations: Form, Function, and Technology. In Human reactions to technology: Claremont symposium on applied social psy-chology , Vol. 145. 1–20. [72] Richard A Krueger. 2014. Focus Groups: A Practical Guide for Applied Research 

(5th ed.). Sage publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 03098260600927575 [73] Yining Lang, Wei Liang, and Lap-Fai Yu. 2019. Virtual Agent Positioning Driven by Scene Semantics in Mixed Reality. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) . 767–775. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2019.8798018 [74] Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, and Harry Hochheiser. 2010. Research Methods in Human-Computer Interaction . Wiley Publishing. https://doi.org/10. 5555/1841406 [75] Soohwan Lee, Seoyeong Hwang, Dajung Kim, and Kyungho Lee. 2025. Conver-sational Agents as Catalysts for Critical Thinking: Challenging Social Influence in Group Decision-Making. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’25) . Associa-tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 154, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706599.3719792 [76] SooHwan Lee, Mingyu Kim, Seoyeong Hwang, Dajung Kim, and Kyungho Lee. 2025. Amplifying Minority Voices: AI-Mediated Devil’s Advocate Sys-tem for Inclusive Group Decision-Making. In Companion Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’25 Companion) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 17–21. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3708557.3716334 Zhou et al. 

[77] Joanne Leong, John Tang, Edward Cutrell, Sasa Junuzovic, Gregory Paul Barib-ault, and Kori Inkpen. 2024. Dittos: Personalized, Embodied Agents That Partici-pate in Meetings When You Are Unavailable. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 

8, CSCW2, Article 494 (Nov. 2024), 28 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3687033 [78] Wei Liang, Xinzhe Yu, Rawan Alghofaili, Yining Lang, and Lap-Fai Yu. 2021. Scene-Aware Behavior Synthesis for Virtual Pets in Mixed Reality. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 472, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445532 [79] Lizi Liao, Grace Hui Yang, and Chirag Shah. 2023. Proactive Conversational Agents in the Post-ChatGPT World. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval 

(Taipei, Taiwan) (SIGIR ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3452–3455. https://doi.org/10.1145/3539618.3594250 [80] Tianjian Liu, Hongzheng Zhao, Yuheng Liu, Xingbo Wang, and Zhenhui Peng. 2024. ComPeer: A Generative Conversational Agent for Proactive Peer Support. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (UIST ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 117, 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3654777.3676430 [81] Xingyu Bruce Liu, Shitao Fang, Weiyan Shi, Chien-Sheng Wu, Takeo Igarashi, and Xiang ‘Anthony’ Chen. 2025. Proactive Conversational Agents with Inner Thoughts. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-puting Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 184, 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713760 [82] Jinghao Luo, Yuchen Tian, Chuxue Cao, Ziyang Luo, Hongzhan Lin, Kaixin Li, Chuyi Kong, Ruichao Yang, and Jing Ma. 2026. From Storage to Experience: A Survey on the Evolution of LLM Agent Memory Mechanisms. (2026). https: //doi.org/10.20944/preprints202601.0618.v2 [83] Fridanna Maricchiolo, Stefano Livi, Marino Bonaiuto, and Augusto Gnisci. 2011. Hand Gestures and Perceived Influence in Small Group Interaction. The Spanish journal of psychology 14, 2 (2011), 755–764. https://doi.org/10.5209/rev_SJOP. 2011.v14.n2.23 [84] Paul Marshall, Yvonne Rogers, and Nadia Pantidi. 2011. Using F-formations to analyse spatial patterns of interaction in physical environments. In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (Hangzhou, China) (CSCW ’11) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 445–454. https://doi.org/10.1145/1958824.1958893 [85] Gerard McAtamney and Caroline Parker. 2006. An Examination of the Effects of a Wearable Display on Informal Face-to-Face Communication. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montréal, Québec, Canada) (CHI ’06) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 45–54. https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124780 [86] Albert Mehrabian et al . 1971. Silent Messages . Vol. 8. Wadsworth Belmont, CA. https://doi.org/10.1525/aa.1973.75.6.02a01110 [87] Albert Mehrabian and Susan R Ferris. 1967. Inference of Attitudes from Non-verbal Communication in Two Channels. Journal of Consulting Psychology 31, 3 (1967), 248. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0024648 [88] Meta. 2022. Meta Connect 2022: Meta Quest Pro, More Social VR and a Look Into the Future . https://about.fb.com/news/2022/10/meta-quest-pro-social-vr-connect-2022/ Accessed on February 16, 2025. [89] Meta. 2025. Key Considerations . https://developers.meta.com/horizon/design/ mr-design-guideline/ Accessed on December 3, 2025. [90] Meta. 2025. Meta All-In-One SDK . https://developers.meta.com/horizon/ downloads/package/meta-xr-sdk-all-in-one-upm Accessed on March 16, 2026. [91] Meta. 2025. Meta Quest Link . https://www.meta.com/en-gb/help/quest/ 1517439565442928 Accessed on March 16, 2026. [92] Meta. 2025. Meta Ray-Ban Display . https://www.meta.com/ai-glasses/meta-ray-ban-display Accessed on March 18, 2026. [93] Microsoft. 2020. Azure Kinect Body Tracking SDK . https://microsoft.github.io/ Azure-Kinect-Body-Tracking/release/1.1.x/namespace_microsoft_1_1_azure_ 1_1_kinect_1_1_body_tracking_adfff503ebc1491373c89e96887cad226.html Accessed on December 2, 2025. [94] Microsoft. 2025. Azure Speech Service . https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ ai-services/speech-service/ Accessed on November 17, 2025. [95] Microsoft. 2026. Copilot in Teams meetings . https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/office/catch-up-on-meetings-with-microsoft-365-copilot-in-teams-0bf9dd3c-96f7-44e2-8bb8-790bedf066b1 Accessed on May 10, 2026. [96] Thomas P. Moran, Leysia Palen, Steve Harrison, Patrick Chiu, Don Kimber, Scott Minneman, William van Melle, and Polle Zellweger. 1997. “I’ll Get That Off the Audio”: A Case Study of Salvaging Multimedia Meeting Records. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Atlanta, Georgia, USA) (CHI ’97) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 202–209. https://doi.org/10.1145/258549.258704 [97] Michael J. Muller and Sarah Kuhn. 1993. Participatory Design. Commun. ACM 

36, 6 (jun 1993), 24–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/153571.255960 [98] Philipp Müller, Michael Xuelin Huang, and Andreas Bulling. 2018. Detecting Low Rapport During Natural Interactions in Small Groups from Non-Verbal Behaviour. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Tokyo, Japan) (IUI ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 153–164. https://doi.org/10.1145/3172944.3172969 [99] Cuong Nguyen, Trung Huu Bui, Jennifer Healey, Jane Elizabeth Hoffswell, and Chen Chen. 2025. Rendering and Anchoring Instructional Data in Aug-mented Reality with Context Awareness. https://patents.google.com/patent/ US20240320886A1 US Patent Application 19310068. [100] Donald A. Norman and Stephen W. Draper. 1986. User Centered System Design; New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction . L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., USA. https://doi.org/10.5555/576915 [101] David G. Novick and Stephen Sutton. 1997. What is Mixed-Initiative Interaction?. In Proceedings of the AAAI spring symposium on computational models for mixed initiative interaction , Vol. 2. 12. https://aaai.org/papers/0021-ss97-04-021-what-is-mixed-initiative-interaction [102] Unversity of Waterloo Center for Teaching Excellence. 2025. Teamwork Skills: Being an Effective Group Member . https://uwaterloo.ca/centre-for-teaching-excellence/catalogs/tip-sheets/teamwork-skills-being-effective-group-member Accessed on October 8, 2025. [103] Shogo Okada, Mayumi Bono, Katsuya Takanashi, Yasuyuki Sumi, and Kat-sumi Nitta. 2013. Context-Based Conversational Hand Gesture Classifica-tion in Narrative Interaction. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM on International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (Sydney, Australia) (ICMI ’13) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 303–310. https: //doi.org/10.1145/2522848.2522898 [104] Orbbec. 2025. Broadening the Application and Accessibility of 3D Vision . https: //www.orbbec.com/microsoft-collaboration Accessed on December 2, 2025. [105] Orbbec. 2025. Orbbec Depth Camera - Femto Bolt . https://www.orbbec.com/ products/tof-camera/femto-bolt Accessed on December 2, 2025. [106] Gun Woo (Warren) Park, Payod Panda, Lev Tankelevitch, and Sean Rintel. 2024. The CoExplorer Technology Probe: A Generative AI-Powered Adaptive Inter-face to Support Intentionality in Planning and Running Video Meetings. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Copen-hagen, Denmark) (DIS ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1638–1657. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661507 [107] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (San Francisco, CA, USA) (UIST ’23) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 2, 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606763 [108] Richard I Parker, Kimberly J Vannest, John L Davis, and Stephanie B Sauber. 2011. Combining Nonoverlap and Trend for Single-Case Research: Tau-U. Behavior therapy 42, 2 (2011), 284–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2010.08.006 [109] Jude Abishek Rayan, Shaokang Jiang, Nishant Balaji, Jinmao Wang, Ian Gross, Cole Biehle, and Steven P. Dow. 2025. Cueing the Crowd: LLM-Driven Conver-sational Cues Across Different Meeting Modalities Increase Topical Diversity of Generated Ideas. In Proceedings of the ACM Collective Intelligence Conference (CI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 297–316. https://doi.org/10.1145/3715928.3737486 [110] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embed-dings using Siamese BERT-Networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) . 3982–3992. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d19-1410 [111] Julian B Rotter. 1966. Generalized Expectancies for Internal Versus External Control of Reinforcement. Psychological monographs: General and applied 80, 1 (1966), 1. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0092976 [112] Kenneth H Rubin and Kim B Burgess. 2001. Social Withdrawal and Anxiety. 

The developmental psychopathology of anxiety Pt III (2001), 407–434. https: //doi.org/10.1093/med:psych/9780195123630.003.0018 [113] Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson. 1974. A Simplest Systematics for the Organization of Turn-Taking for Conversation. language 

50, 4 (1974), 696–735. https://doi.org/10.2307/412243 [114] Prithiv Sakthi. 2025. Speech Emotion Classification . https://huggingface.co/ prithivMLmods/Speech-Emotion-Classification Accessed on December 2, 2025. [115] Ben Shneiderman. 2000. Universal Usability. Commun. ACM 43, 5 (may 2000), 84–91. https://doi.org/10.1145/332833.332843 [116] Franca Singh and Nora Denner. 2025. Illuminating Informal Communication in Organizations-A Scoping Review. Journal of Communication Management 

(2025), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1108/JCOM-11-2024-0237 [117] Succeed Socially. 2025. When You’re Better At Group Conversations Than Talking One-On-One . https://www.succeedsocially.com/oneononeharder Accessed on December 2, 2025. [118] Spatial. 2018. Spatial - Collaborate from Anywhere in AR . https://www.youtube. com/watch?v=PG3tQYlZ6JQ Accessed on December 2, 2025. [119] Maia Stiber, Dan Bohus, and Sean Andrist. 2024. “Uh, This One?”: Leveraging Behavioral Signals for Detecting Confusion during Physical Tasks. In Proceed-ings of the 26th International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (San Jose, ChatMuse 

Costa Rica) (ICMI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 194–203. https://doi.org/10.1145/3678957.3685727 [120] Katherine Qianwen Sun and Michael L Slepian. 2020. The Conversations We Seek to Avoid. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 160 (2020), 87–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2020.03.002 [121] Sentence Transformer. 2025. Sentence Transformer - all-MiniLM-L6-v2 . https: //huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2 Accessed on March 29, 2026. [122] Andreia Valente, Daniel Simoes Lopes, Nuno Nunes, and Augusto Esteves. 2022. Empathic Aurea: Exploring the Effects of an Augmented Reality Cue for Emotional Sharing Across Three Face-to-Face Tasks. In 2022 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user interfaces (VR) . IEEE, 158–166. https://doi.org/10. 1109/VR51125.2022.00034 [123] Alessandro Vinciarelli, Fabio Valente, Sree Harsha Yella, and Ashtosh Sapru. 2011. Understanding Social Signals in Multi-Party Conversations: Automatic Recognition of Socio-Emotional Roles in the AMI Meeting Corpus. , 374-379 pages. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSMC.2011.6083694 [124] Merriam Webster. n.d.. Muse . https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ muse Accessed on March 15, 2026. [125] Jimmy Wei, Kurt Shuster, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, Jack Urbanek, and Mojtaba Komeili. 2023. Multi-Party Chat: Conversational Agents in Group Settings with Humans and Models. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2304.13835 (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.13835 [126] Bufang Yang, Yunqi Guo, Lilin Xu, Zhenyu Yan, Hongkai Chen, Guoliang Xing, and Xiaofan Jiang. 2025. SocialMind: LLM-Based Proactive AR Social Assistive System with Human-Like Perception for In-Situ Live Interactions. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 9, 1, Article 23 (March 2025), 30 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3712286 [127] Wong Gwen Yi. 2021. Group Conversations: Why are They so Difficult? https: //www.tribeless.co/blog/group-conversations-why-are-they-difficult Accessed on January 21, 2026. [128] Gayoung Yoo, Daehui Kim, Gyuhee Park, Suhwan Jung, Okkeun Lee, Hyun-min Kang, Yong Gu Ji, and Hyochang Kim. 2026. Did You Notice Me? Effects of Distance and F-Formation on Mobile Robot Perception in Group Conver-sation. In Companion Proceedings of the 21st ACM/IEEE International Confer-ence on Human-Robot Interaction (Edinburgh, Scotland, UK) (HRI Companion ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 892–896. https://doi.org/10.1145/3776734.3794523 [129] Krista K Young and Vicente Talanquer. 2013. Effect of Different Types of Small-Group Activities on Students’ Conversations. Journal of Chemical Education 90, 9 (2013), 1123–1129. https://doi.org/10.1021/ed400049a [130] Shizhen Zhang, Shengxin Li, and Quan Li. 2025. Understood: Real-Time Com-munication Support for Adults with ADHD Using Mixed Reality. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 

(Busan, South Korea) (UIST ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 205, 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3746059.3747602 [131] Youpeng Zhang, Nuwan Janaka, Ashwin Ram, Peilin Yin, Yang Tian, Shengdong Zhao, and Pierre Dragicevic. 2025. WSCoach: Wearable Real-time Auditory Feedback for Reducing Unwanted Words in Daily Communication. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 9, 3, Article 152 (Sept. 2025), 30 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3749531 [132] Ke Zhou, Marios Constantinides, Sagar Joglekar, and Daniele Quercia. 2022. Predicting Meeting Success With Nuanced Emotions. IEEE Pervasive Computing 

21, 2 (2022), 51–59. https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2022.3145047 [133] Shaoze Zhou, Diana Nelly Rivera Rodriguez, Pedro Remior, Joaquin Frangi, Lingyao Li, Renkai Ma, Janet G. Johnson, Christine Lisetti, and Chen Chen. 2026. Exploring Needs and Design Opportunities for Proactive Information Support in In-Person Small-Group Conversations. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 274, 7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3772363.3799279 [134] Zoom. 2026. Zoom AI Companion . https://www.zoom.com/en/products/ai-assistant Accessed on May 10, 2026. Zhou et al. 

## A Disclaimer 

All studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). All participants were required to read and sign the approved in-formed consent before each study session. Consent was obtained from participants appearing in the demonstrative figures. Each study session in Section 3 and Section 5 lasted approximately 90 min-utes. 

## B Implementation and Calibration 

This section provides supplementary materials for Section 4, detail-ing the implementation and calibration processes. 

Implementation. ChatMuse is designed as a PC extended reality system, offloading rendering to a separate GPU-enabled host ma-chine via Meta Quest Link [ 91 ]. A Unity-based application was de-veloped using the Meta XR All-In-One SDK (version 85.0) [ 90 ] to ren-der real-time conversational support information and to control the Orbbec Femto Bolt camera for tracking the poses of non-supported conversation participants. A Python backend was implemented to transcribe and diarize speech from all conversation participants us-ing Azure’s real-time speech and diarization SDK [ 94 ], maintain the group conversational context, generate 𝑃𝑇 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑒 and 𝑃𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑓 , and infer proactive decisions and support information using an LLM-based agent. GPT-4.1 [2] was used during prototyping and study. 

Calibration. Calibration was required before each user study ses-sion (Section 5). Calibrations of ChatMuse follow two steps: 

• Calibration of RGB-D camera. Calibrating the RGB-D camera enables ChatMuse to capture the gaze directions of non-MR con-versation participants within the same coordinate system as the MR headset. To facilitate pose tracking, a virtual RGB-D camera is manually positioned so that the tracked positions of the eye and nose of all conversation participants are aligned with their physi-cal counterparts (Figure 4b). We used one controller as the anchor to calibrate the RGB-D camera, streamlining the ChatMuse setup (Figure 4a). 

• Mapping of the conversation participant, diarized speaker ID, and tracked body ID. Our second step of calibration results in a mapping among the participant’s preferred name, the speaker ID generated by the Azure diarization pipeline [ 94 ], and the body ID tracked by the RGB-D camera. Before using ChatMuse, each conversation participant is required to read a designated paragraph aloud, taking turns and including their preferred name. The Chat-Muse system then automatically establishes an internal mapping, which is used by the designed agentic pipeline (Figure 3). 

## C Tracking Performance of the RGB-D Camera 

This section presents supplementary benchmarking results for the Orbbec camera [ 105 ] used to track the head poses of conversation partners. Our goal is to understand how reliably the instrumented RGB-D camera can track participants across the seating area and to determine the spatial arrangement of conversation participants. We divided the experimental space into a 7 × 17 grid, and, for each cell (𝑥, 𝑦 ), computed a tracking confidence score (𝑓 𝑥,𝑦 ). Since we focused on participants’ gaze direction, we computed 𝑓 𝑥,𝑦 using only the key joints ( 𝐽 ) most relevant to gaze estimation: the head, nose, left eye, and right eye. The tracking confidence score at frame 

𝑖 (𝑓 𝑥,𝑦,𝑖 ) is approximated by Equation (1). Here, 𝑓 𝑥,𝑦,𝑖,𝑗 denotes the inferred tracking confidence for joint 𝑗 , taking values in {0, 1, 2}

as provided by Azure Kinect SDK [ 93 ]. 𝑓 𝑥,𝑦,𝑖 = 0 indicates that all joints in 𝐽 have a confidence value of 0 (i.e., are not tracked) at frame 𝑖 . 𝑓 𝑥,𝑦 is then computed by Equation (2), where 𝑁 is the total number of frames sampled in the one-minute interval, and 𝑓 max = 2

denotes the maximum joint confidence value. 

𝑓 𝑥,𝑦,𝑖 = 1

|𝐽 |∑︁ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽 

𝑓 𝑥,𝑦,𝑖,𝑗 (1) 

𝑓 𝑥,𝑦 = 1

𝑁 × 𝑓 max 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑓 𝑥,𝑦,𝑖 (2) Figure 8 shows the results for the four-person and three-person conversation layouts, along with the corresponding seat arrange-ments. The MR user’s seat was intentionally placed outside the camera’s field of view, whereas the non-MR users were placed in areas with high tracking confidence. 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                                                                                                          

> 0.00
> 1.00
> 0.00
> 0.00
> 1.00
> 1.00
> 1.00 1.00
> 0.00
> 1.00
> 1.00 1.00
> 1.00 1.00
> 1.00
> 1.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.28 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.41 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.35 0.00 0.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.52 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.98 0.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.47 0.93 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.91 0.89 0.04
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.54 0.77 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.74 0.97 0.95 1.00 0.60
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

(a)                                                                                                          

> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.28 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.41 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.35 0.00 0.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.52 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.98 0.00
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.47 0.93 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.91 0.89 0.04
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.54 0.77 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.74 0.97 0.95 1.00 0.60
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

(b) 

Figure 8: Tracking performance of the RGB-D camera and the spatial arrangement for (a) four-person and (b) three-person conversations. The top red chair represents the MR user. Numbers in each cell represent the measured tracking confidence score. 

## D Interpersonal Communication Skills Inventory (ICSI) Questionnaires 

The Interpersonal Communication Skills Inventory (ICSI) [ 1, 13 , 16 ]was used in studies described in Section 3 and Section 5. This stan-dardized questionnaire was used to assess participants’ communi-cation skills, which is structured into four sections: sending clear messages , listening , giving and receiving feedback , and handling emo-tional interactions . All questions were rated on a scale of usually ,

sometimes , and seldom . Table 2 shows the scoring key. 

Section I: Sending Clear Messages 

• Q1. Is it difficult for you to talk to other people? ChatMuse 

• Q2. When you are trying to explain something, do others tend to put words in your mouth or finish your sentences for you? 

• Q3. In conversation, do your words usually come out the way you would like? 

• Q4. Do you find it difficult to express your ideas when they differ from the ideas of people around you? 

• Q5. Do you assume that the other person knows what you are trying to say, and leave it to him/her to ask you questions? 

• Q6. Do others seem interested and attentive when you are talking to them? 

• Q7. When speaking, is it easy for you to recognize how others are reacting to what you are saying? 

• Q8. Do you ask the other person to tell you how she/he feels about the point you are trying to make? 

• Q9. Are you aware of how your tone of voice may affect others? 

• Q10. In conversation, do you look to talk about things of interest to both you and the other person? 

Section II: Listening 

• Q11. In conversation, do you tend to do more talking than the other person does? 

• Q12. In conversation, do you ask the other person questions when you don’t understand what they’ve said? 

• Q13. In conversation, do you often try to figure out what the other person is going to say before they’ve finished talking? 

• Q14. Do you find yourself not paying attention while in conver-sation with others? 

• Q15. In conversation, can you easily tell the difference between what the person is saying and how he/she may be feeling? 

• Q16. After the other person is done speaking, do you clarify what you heard them say before you offer a response? 

• Q17. In conversation, do you tend to finish sentences or supply words for the other person? 

• Q18. In conversation, do you find yourself paying most attention to facts and details, and frequently missing the emotional tone of the speakers’ voice? 

• Q19. In conversation, do you let the other person finish talking before reacting to what she/he says? 

• Q20. Is it difficult for you to see things from the other person’s point of view? 

Section III: Giving and Getting Feedback 

• Q21. Is it difficult to hear or accept constructive criticism from the other person? 

• Q22. Do you refrain from saying something that you think will upset someone or make matters worse? 

• Q23. When someone hurts your feelings, do you discuss this with him/her? 

• Q24. In conversation, do you try to put yourself in the other person’s shoes? 

• Q25. Do you become uneasy when someone pays you a compli-ment? 

• Q26. Do you find it difficult to disagree with others because you are afraid they will get angry? 

• Q27. Do you find it difficult to compliment or praise others? 

• Q28. Do others remark that you always seem to think you are right? 

• Q29. Do you find that others seem to get defensive when you disagree with their point of view? 

• Q30. Do you help others to understand you by saying how you feel? 

Section IV: Handling Emotional Interactions 

• Q31. Do you have a tendency to change the subject when the other person’s feelings enter into the discussion? 

• Q32. Does it upset you a great deal when someone disagrees with you? 

• Q33. Do you find it difficult to think clearly when you are angry with someone? 

• Q34. When a problem arises between you and another person, can you discuss it without getting angry? 

• Q35. Are you satisfied with the way you handle differences with others? 

• Q36. Do you sulk for a long time when someone upsets you? 

• Q37. Do you apologize to someone whose feelings you may have hurt? 

• Q38. Do you admit that you’re wrong when you know that you are/were wrong about something? 

• Q39. Do you avoid or change the topic if someone is expressing his or her feelings in a conversation? 

• Q40. When someone becomes upset, do you find it difficult to continue the conversation? 

## E Participant Demographics 

This section describes the demographics of the recruited partici-pants and the composition of participant groups. Participants were assigned to groups based on their scheduling availability. We use FG# and FP# to index the participant group and participant in the formative study (Section 3). Likewise, G# and P# are used to index participant group and participant in the final user study (Section 5). Table 3 shows the demographics of the recruited participants in the formative study (Section 3). Participants using PT1 and PT2 are highlighted in green and blue , respectively. Table 4 shows the demographics of the recruited participants involved in the user study described in Section 5. Participants wearing the MR headset are highlighted in orange . P18 withdrew from the study due to an unexpected event. As a result, one of the researchers served as a non-MR conversation participant, but did not participate in or influence the post-study focus group discussion. 

## F Survey Responses 

This section describes participants’ post-session survey responses. Figure 9a shows the responses of System Usability Scale (SUS) reported by MR users for 𝐶 𝑁 𝑜𝐹𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 and 𝐶 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑒 . Figure 9b–c describe the responses of NASA T ask Load Inde x (NASA TLX) from both MR user and participants not wearing the headset. No statistically significant differences ( 𝑝 > .05 ) were found across any of the six NASA TLX dimensions for participants who did not wear the MR headset (Figure 9c). Zhou et al. 

Table 2: Assigned scores for responses on the Interpersonal Communication Skills Inventory [1, 13, 16]. Question ID  “Usually”  “Sometimes”  “Seldom”  Question ID  “Usually”  “Sometimes”  “Seldom” 

Q1  0 1 3 Q21  0 1 3

Q2  0 1 3 Q22  3 1 0

Q3  3 1 0 Q23  3 1 0

Q4  0 1 3 Q24  3 1 0

Q5  0 1 3 Q25  0 1 3

Q6  3 1 0 Q26  0 1 3

Q7  3 1 0 Q27  0 1 3

Q8  3 1 0 Q28  0 1 3

Q9  3 1 0 Q29  0 1 3

Q10  3 1 0 Q30  3 1 0

Q11  0 1 3 Q31  0 1 3

Q12  3 1 0 Q32  0 1 3

Q13  0 1 3 Q33  0 1 3

Q14  0 1 3 Q34  3 1 0

Q15  3 1 0 Q35  3 1 0

Q16  3 1 0 Q36  0 1 3

Q17  0 1 3 Q37  3 1 0

Q18  0 1 3 Q38  3 1 0

Q19  3 1 0 Q39  0 1 3

Q20  0 1 3 Q40  0 1 3

Table 3: Demographics of the formative study participants. Participants using PT1 and PT2 are highlighted in green and blue , respectively. Responses of AI Experience and Blind Typing reflect participants’ agreement with the statements “I am experienced in using AI tools” and “I am experienced in typing without looking at the keyboard,” respectively, with 5 indicating 

strongly agree and 1 indicating strongly disagree . Each Interpersonal Communication Skill Inventory [ 1 , 13 , 16 ] score ranges from 0 to 30 , with higher scores indicating areas of strength. Group                                                                                                               

> ID
> Participant
> ID Sex Age Education
> Group
> Conversation
> Frequency
> AI
> Experience
> Blind
> Typing
> Interpersonal Communication Skill Inventory Scores
> Sending Clear
> Messages Listening Giving and
> Getting Feedback
> Handling Emotional
> Interactions
> FG1
> FP1 M24 Undergraduate Rarely 5410 15 15 13
> FP2 M24 Undergraduate Daily 5419 12 18 13
> FP3 M31 Graduate Rarely 4422 16 11 15
> FP4 M25 Undergraduate Weekly 4314 19 15 18
> FG2
> FP5 M26 Undergraduate Monthly 5524 11 18 18
> FP6 M30 Graduate Weekly 4321 18 14 26
> FP7 X21 Undergraduate Weekly 5422 19 19 16
> FG3
> FP8 M26 Graduate Monthly 3423 15 13 13
> FP9 M28 Undergraduate Rarely 5520 16 22 22
> FP10 F20 High School Weekly 4321 21 19 22
> avg. (std.) 25.5 (3.5) 19.6 (4.4) 16.2 (3.2) 16.4 (3.3) 17.6 (4.5)

ChatMuse 

Table 4: Demographics of the participants for evaluation. Participants wearing the MR headset are highlighted with orange . Responses of AI experience and topic familiarity reflect participants’ agreement with the statements “I am experienced in using AI tools” and “I am familiar with the given topic,” respectively, with 5 indicating strongly agree and 1 indicating strongly disagree . Each Interpersonal Communication Skill Inventory [ 1, 13 , 16 ] score ranges from 0 to 30 , with higher scores indicating areas of strength. P18 withdrew from the study due to an unexpected event; one of the researchers served as the unsupported conversation participant, but did not participate in or influence the post-study focus group discussion. Group                                              

> ID
> Participant
> ID Gender Age
> Group
> Conversation
> Frequency
> AI
> Experience
> Topic Familiarity Interpersonal Communication Skill Inventory Scores
> T1 T2 T3 Sending Clear
> Messages Listening Giving and
> Getting Feedback
> Handling Emotional
> Interactions
> G1
> P1 M26 Weekly 553420 16 16 24
> P2 M28 Monthly 444218 20 14 12
> P3 M31 Weekly 441217 20 16 19
> G2
> P4 W25 Weekly

5 5 1 3 22  19  24  26                           

> P5 M35 Monthly 552320 24 26 24
> P6 W30 Rarely 441413 10 11 13
> G3
> P7 M25 Monthly

5 5 2 4 21  13  17  10                                      

> P8 M31 Monthly 443324 12 16 17
> P9 M25 Rarely 5532313 17 14
> P10 M25 Monthly 442217 18 11 15
> G4
> P11 M20 Daily

4 4 2 2 20  14  12  19                           

> P12 X21 Weekly 443213 11 13 16
> P13 M23 Daily 555219 17 11 24
> G5
> P14 M27 Monthly

5 5 1 3 19  14  20  11     

> P15 M28 Rarely

4 4 2 2 17  16  9 9    

> P16 M26 Monthly

4 4 1 1 15  15  19  20                        

> G6
> P17 M22 Daily 444317 18 22 26
> P18 N/A
> P19 M21 Weekly 444211 12 11 14

avg . (std.) 26.1 (4. 0) 17.0 (4. 9) 15.1 (3. 9) 15.8 (4.8) 17. 4 (5.7)(a)  (c) (b) 

Figure 9: Survey responses of SUS and NASA TLX. (a) Responses of SUS from MR users. (b) Responses of NASA TLX from participants wearing MR headset. (c) Responses of NASA TLX from participants not wearing MR headset.