Title: TargetFinder: Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.19907v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Jul 2026 00:45:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# TargetFinder : Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces 

# Ahmed Ben Akouche 

> benakouche@isir.upmc.fr

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Inserm, Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique, ISIR F-75005 Paris, France 

# Géry Casiez 

> gery.casiez@univ-lille.fr

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL Lille, France 

# Mathieu Nancel 

> mathieu.nancel@inria.fr

Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL Lille, France 

# Julien Gori 

> julien.gori@sorbonne-universite.fr

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Inserm, Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique, ISIR F-75005 Paris, France 

## Abstract 

"Target-aware" pointing techniques, like Bubble Cursor or Semantic Pointing, outperform traditional pointing by leveraging knowledge of target locations. Yet the lack of application-agnostic widget geometry information limits their adoption across the desktop. We present TargetFinder, a computer vision-based system for real-time detection of GUI widgets. TargetFinder leverages several fine-tuned YOLO networks trained on a new dataset of 520 annotated desktop screen-shots ( ∼38,000 annotations) spanning Windows, macOS, Ubuntu, and web interfaces. TargetFinder uses lightweight screen monitoring and low-latency detection, achieving millisecond responsiveness suitable for interactive use. Evaluations show that TargetFinder out-performs the baseline methods (OmniParser and REMAUI), while system-wide implementations of Bubble Cursor and Semantic Point-ing demonstrate the feasibility of deploying universal target-aware techniques that work across applications. We release the dataset, models, annotation tool, and an open-source library for research and applications. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Graphical user interfaces ; •

Computing methodologies → Object detection .

## Keywords 

pointing, object detection, widgets, GUI, bubble cursor, semantic pointing, computer vision 

## 1 Introduction 

Widgets, such as buttons, menus, sliders, or text fields, are interac-tive elements that compose Graphical User Interfaces (GUI). Their nature, position, and dimensional properties often remain encap-sulated within application logic, and mostly inaccessible to other applications. This limitation restricts the development of advanced interaction techniques across multiple domains [ 34 ]. A prominent example is target-aware selection facilitation, i.e. techniques requir-ing knowledge of all target positions and dimensions on a display, of 

> Preprint, 2026
> 2026. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for redistribution.

which many have been proposed in the HCI literature. This includes area cursors [ 17 , 23 , 26 , 29 , 35 , 55 , 59 ], cursors that dynamically manipulate the control-display ratio [ 11 , 27 ], expanding/movable targets [ 7, 47 , 63 ], and techniques based on predicting user in-tent [ 5 , 41 , 67 ]. These techniques have been demonstrated only in application-specific prototypes where researchers maintain direct control over the interface, or within web browsers whose layout en-gine APIs readily expose target geometry [ 24 ]. The lack of accessible widget geometry prevents system-wide implementation of target-aware pointing techniques, limiting users to “regular” target-agnostic interactions [ 14 ], despite research consistently demonstrating the superior performance of target-aware techniques [ 11 , 26 , 27 ]. To our knowledge, the latter have seldom been evaluated in the wild, with the exception of a Bubble Cursor web-browser implementation cited in [ 34 , ref. 8] but no longer accessible. Target-agnostic methods may also benefit from widget information; for example, the transfer function tuning in AutoGain [ 37 ] could be made more precise with target size data. Accessibility APIs should be the tool of choice for system-wide target-aware techniques, as they theoretically provide the necessary widget information, but are both OS and application-dependent 1. Most critically, many third-party applications fail to implement accessibility support [ 1 , 3, 10 , 50 ], making reliable wid-get layout information difficult to obtain. For example, sometimes a widget’s higher-level container or the window itself is returned [ 43 ]. We present TargetFinder , a cross-platform library built around a computer vision-based tool for identifying interface widgets via real-time analysis of desktop environments. We fine-tune object detectors from the YOLO family [ 53 ] on a novel dataset of annotated desktop interface screenshots spanning multiple OS’s and application types. 

TargetFinder continuously monitors the screen. Significant changes are detected using fast comparison of low-resolution screen-shots, upon which a full-resolution screenshot is processed by the YOLO model, which returns within milliseconds the bounding box coordinates of all visible interface widgets, along with their types: buttons, text fields, sliders etc. The reasonably short processing latency (less than 210 ms on a consumer-grade laptop; see §7) makes  

> 1each OS offers distinct formats and capabilities, the granularity of exposed informa-tion is application-dependent making generic inspections unreliable, and DPI scaling inconsistencies can cause mismatches between reported and actual widget locations 1arXiv:2607.19907v1 [cs.HC] 22 Jul 2026 Preprint, HAL, 2026 Ahmed Ben Akouche, Géry Casiez, Mathieu Nancel, and Julien Gori

the system responsive enough for most interactive applications with-out introducing perceptible delays in user workflows, and realistically enables real-time use. A fundamental advantage of our pure computer vision-based approach is its independence from application internals, accessibility APIs, or platform-specific frameworks. Thanks to the diversity of the training set, TargetFinder works across operating systems (Windows, macOS, Ubuntu), application frameworks (native, web, third-party), and even legacy software. The contributions of this article are as follows: 

New annotated widget dataset: We present a new dataset of 520 annotated screenshots covering Windows, macOS, Ubuntu, as well as web interfaces (130 images per category, each image containing multiple widgets). The entire dataset consists of about 38,000 annotations. We additionally provide a test set of 71 annotated screenshots, with 4,206 annotations, from older software covering diverse visual themes (light, dark, etc. ) and varying image resolutions. 

Trained YOLO networks and evaluation: We trained several YOLO models on our dataset and evaluated the performance of each of them to optimize TargetFinder . We then present a comprehensive comparison of multiple widget detection methods. TargetFinder outperforms the existing baselines (OmniParser and REMAUI) evaluated in our study. We also analyze generalization, including cross-OS transfer, desk-top/mobile adaptability, and transfer to legacy software. 

Library: We provide a library that includes a Python mod-ule ( TargetFinder ) for real-time widget detection, enabling easy integration into external applications or interaction tech-niques. The library is cross-platform and hosted on PyPI, provides a command-line interface to visualize detections in real time through an overlay, and includes the two interaction techniques, Bubble Cursor and Semantic Pointing, tested on several versions of Windows and Ubuntu with X11. 

System-wide proof-of-concept: We implemented system-wide versions of two target-aware selection techniques, the Bubble Cursor [ 26 ] and Semantic Pointing [ 11 ], installable on any Windows 10-11 and Ubuntu-X11 machines and demonstrate the real-time applicability of TargetFinder .All the above contributions are released as open resources, includ-ing the public datasets 2 and the library 3. This work highlights the potential of computer vision to overcome traditional barriers to ac-cessing GUI widgets programmatically, and opens new perspectives for developing interaction techniques that do not require accessing or modifying application source code. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Goals of GUI widget detection 

Most research on GUI widget detection has focused on mobile contexts. The primary goal has been interface reconstruction i.e. 

the automatic generation of functional code from screenshots or prototypes. For instance, REMAUI leverages widget detection to reverse engineer mobile user interfaces, converting images into 

> 2https://osf.io/fr6y4/overview
> 3https://github.com/AHMEDBENAKOUCHE/target_finder_toolkit.git

working UI code [ 49 ]. Baulé et al . review a variety of systems developed for automatic GUI code generation from images [ 8 ], including work such as Pix2Code [ 9]. GUI widget detection is also used in other downstream tasks; for example, predicting the tappability of widgets [57], or content description generation [6]. In the desktop context, the main goal is to gather widget in-formation for artificial agents that interact directly with GUIs e.g. 

OS-ATLAS [ 60 ], WinClick [ 31 ], see also [ 45 , 46 ]. These approaches do not aim for exhaustive detection of GUI widgets. Instead, they target instruction-driven interaction tasks where the agent must locate one or several specific widgets relevant to the requested action. An exception is OmniParser [ 42 ], which performs exhaustive widget detection and associates user actions to them. 

## 2.2 Identifying widgets from pixels via computer vision 

Identifying GUI widgets from images has been addressed through classical image processing and deep learning approaches. Classical image processing approaches rely on low-level operations like edge detection, dilation, and component segmentation. They are computa-tionally efficient and unsupervised, i.e. they do not require annotated training data, but often involve manual tuning of hyperparameters, and can lack robustness. These techniques tend to over-segment small or decorative non-interactive elements, such as tiny icons or text, which can clutter the results and reduce practical usefulness. An example is REMAUI [ 49 ], which detects non-textual elements using the Canny edge detection [ 13 ], followed by dilation to merge close components and close gaps in contours. Object detection models based on supervised neural networks, such as YOLO [ 4], Faster R-CNN [ 18 ], and SSD [ 65 ], offer greater flexibility and accuracy. Their main strength is their ability to detect widgets without having to rely on rules or intuitions specified by researchers. Many of these models are pre-trained on large datasets, so only fine-tuning on GUI-specific data is needed. The main limit of these supervised methods is that they require labeled data i.e. 

datasets of images where all GUI widgets are identified. Building or acquiring such datasets is costly, since a single desktop GUI image may contain more than 200 widgets. While several neural network-based object detection for exhaustive widget identification exist for mobile interface recognition [ 4, 18 , 61 ], these trained models fail to generalize to desktop interfaces 4. In the desktop domain, OmniParser [ 42 ] uses a YOLOv8 model trained on automatically labeled web screenshots (derived from the DOM), combined with optical character recognition (OCR) and icon features extracted with BLIP-v2 to support a vision-enabled language model (GPT-4V). Another notable work is that of Martínez-Rojas et al . [45 ], which employs a multi-model detection pipeline consisting of five separately trained YOLOv8 networks, each specialized in detecting widgets at a different hierarchical level. We include both systems as baselines in §4.3. Hybrid approaches, that combine classical computer vision techniques with deep learning, like UIED [61], also exist. Segmentation models such as SAM [ 52 ] and MobileSAM [ 64 ]are an alternative solution. These models generate precise masks for visible objects, which can help refine the boundaries of GUI widgets.      

> 4We tested the model from Chen et al .[18 ], trained on 40k images of the RICO dataset, with poor results; examples are provided in the supplementary materials. 2TargetFinder : Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces Preprint, HAL, 2026

However, limitations are that they segment everything visible in the image, including non-interactive regions and are computationally demanding. A final work that should be mentioned, and that pre-dates modern computer vision, is Prefab [ 20 ], which attempts to recover widget structure directly from pixels from manually con-structed visual prototypes. Prefab was namely used for a Windows 7 implementation of a Bubble Cursor [21]. 

## 2.3 Alternate methods to detect widgets 

Other than image processing, we found three other methods in the literature to detect widget information. In all three cases, the author’s goal was to perform a field study of Fitts’ law, which requires infor-mation about the target sizes and locations. Several works have exploited the Accessibility/Automation API 5.Chapuis and colleagues [ 15 , 16 ] tried to access target size and loca-tion via the accessibility API on Mac OS X, and Linux with GTK, but reported having to use undocumented functionalities to access additional information such as stacking order, and report being able to extract about 22% of possible target bounds. Hurst et al . report that the Windows accessibility API alone enabled them to find 74% of on-screen targets [ 33 ], while Evans and Wobbrock achieved 67% precision in their work with the Windows automation API [ 22 ]. In all these cases, the accessibility API was always leveraged to determine the selected widget, and not all widgets on screen. Evans and Wobbrock used the automation API to prelabel selected widgets before submitting them to Amazon mechanical Turk for final annotation [ 22 ]. To improve reliability, each image was labeled by three independent workers, though the agreement rate was accord-ing to the authors unexpectedly low, at around 40%. 

Application-specific implementations : Gajos et al . developed a Firefox extension that leveraged the web browser’s layout engine to access webpage geometry, including most clickable elements [ 24 ]. While they did not report the accuracy of their method, it is likely to be high 6. Before that, Hurst et al . had developed a similar system for the open-source image editing software GIMP [32]. 

## 2.4 Existing GUI datasets with labeled elements 

The majority of existing GUI datasets focus on mobile user interfaces, see for example RICO [ 19 ] and VINS [ 12 ]. Fully annotated public desktop GUI datasets are scarce. To date, only a few efforts have attempted to provide comprehensive annotations: 

• The Waltteri Github repository [ 2] includes 51 fully anno-tated desktop screenshots. While annotation documentation is limited, the labels appear to be precise and complete. 

• The dataset proposed by Martínez-Rojas et al . [45 ] contains 100 manually annotated desktop UI images. 

• DAWOD [ 66 ] is a dataset of synthetic GUI images, but is not publicly available.    

> 5On Windows, Microsoft Active Accessibility (MSAA) has been originally introduced to expose information about UI elements [ 1]. From 2005, it has been progressively replaced by UI Automation (UIA) but both remain available today [ 3]. They are both natively supported by languages such as C++ and C# but other languages, such as Java and Node.js, provide limited or complex support. Frameworks, like Qt, do not natively support UIA. In all cases, accessibility is not enabled by default and the developer needs to write more or less code to support accessibility in an application.
> 6We developed a similar browser extension and obtained encouraging results, though we do not report on it here, as it does not offer a system-wide solution.

• OmniParser [ 42 ] relies on a large collection of automatically labeled web screenshots (67k, derived from the DOM). How-ever, the dataset is not publicly available, covers only web interfaces, and does not contain screenshots of native desktop GUIs. Other datasets, such as OmniACT [ 36 ] and OS-ATLAS [60 ], provide partially annotated desktop and web interface images, pri-marily aimed at training autonomous agents, but are not designed for comprehensive GUI element detection. OS-ATLAS leverages accessibility APIs for desktop and mobile platforms, and HTML parsing for web interfaces, but images are intentionally partially labeled to preserve diversity. For OmniACT, desktop annotations are manually created by human annotators using a dedicated PyQt interface without aiming for full coverage. The UI-Vision bench-mark [ 48 ] was designed for GUI perception and interaction in desktop environments. The associated paper claims high-quality annotations including bounding boxes, UI element labels, and actions such as clicks and drags, but the publicly available data includes only a few annotations per image, which are cropped to application windows. 

## 3 Dataset acquisition 3.1 Tool 

We developed an annotation tool called WidgetAnnotator 7 for semi-automatic annotations of GUI images. The user can use several prelabeling methods 8 and interactively adjust, correct, or complete the annotations directly on the image using direct manipulation (see Fig. 7). In addition, WidgetAnnotator supports multi-class pre-classification through a predefined list of widget categories (buttons, sliders, text fields, etc. ), using three existing convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on mobile data from [ 54 ]. We estimate that the tool reduced annotation time by a factor two. 

## 3.2 Procedure 

We sourced partially annotated desktop images from OS-ATLAS [ 60 ]and OmniACT [ 36 ]. We used OS-ATLAS for images of native desktop GUIs, which contains data from Windows, macOS, and Ubuntu operating systems for various versions of the platforms. All images were annotated from scratch using WidgetAnnotator. The web category was populated with images from OmniACT. The partial web annotations were generally accurate and visually aligned, so we retained the existing bounding boxes and completed the labeling. The annotation process involved the initial pre-labeling phase provided by WidgetAnnotator. We then manually corrected the labeling to ensure bounding boxes precisely enclosed each widget according to rules further detailed in the supplementary materials; notably: when the widget edge was visually identifiable, the bounding box was drawn one pixel away 9; when the boundary was ambiguous, the annotator verified the target’s extent directly on a real system (e.g. by hovering to reveal the interactive region) when possible. Finally, we assigned class labels according to a fixed taxonomy of six GUI widget types ( ToggleButton , TextInput , Slider , Text , HyperLink , 

> 7https://github.com/AHMEDBENAKOUCHE/ui-widget-annotator-a-tool-for-fast-and-efficient-gui-annotation.git
> 8These include REMAUI and UIED, MobileSAM, and now, our trained YOLO model.
> 9Note that differences in annotation padding across datasets mainly affect IoU-based metrics, and barely affect classification metrics such as precision, recall or F1-score. 3Preprint, HAL, 2026 Ahmed Ben Akouche, Géry Casiez, Mathieu Nancel, and Julien Gori

Button ), further detailed in §9.2. Since classification of target type 

is not critical to our envisioned applications, we do not report extensively on this part, but discuss this further in §7. To evaluate how closely other annotators can reproduce the anno-tations contained in our dataset while following the same annotation protocol, we randomly sampled 15 images and asked three inde-pendent annotators to re-label them using the same guidelines. We then measured their agreement with the primary annotator as ground truth (see §9.4), and found high agreement (mean F1 score of 0.933, mean mIoU of 0.892), indicating that both the task and protocol are well-defined, and that the present annotations are reliable. 

## 3.3 Dataset presentation 

Our final dataset comprises 520 fully labeled images, evenly dis-tributed across the four platforms: Windows (primarily Windows 10 with some Windows 11), Linux (Ubuntu with GNOME environ-ment), macOS and Web (130 images each). It includes typical native OS interfaces such as desktop views, system settings, file browsers, calculators, and system tools. It also covers productivity suites like LibreOffice, Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Draw, as well as developer environments like PyCharm and Visual Studio Code. For the web category, the screenshots come from different websites such as Amazon, Coursera, Booking, Indeed, and Wikipedia. A random selection of labeled screenshots is displayed Fig. 1. The images are predominantly high-resolution; the dominant resolutions for each platform are 2560 ×1440 for Windows and Linux, 2880 ×1800 for macOS, and 1440 ×900 for web interfaces. Each image is associated with a YOLO-format annotation file. In total, we annotated 37,919 GUI widgets across six classes. On average, each image contains approximately 73 widgets, with a minimum of 8 and a maximum of 252 per image. As shown in Fig. 2, the dataset exhibits a strong class imbalance, with Button elements being the most frequent, particularly on Linux and macOS, while categories such as TextInput and Slider appear less often; web interfaces contain comparatively more Text and Hyperlink annotations. Since we expect that smaller widgets are more difficult to identify, we also report the distribution of widget sizes in our dataset in §5.1, expressed in YOLO-pixels 10 . It reveals an asymetric, positive skewed distribution similar to an EMG distribution [ 25 ], with a median widget size of about 9 YOLO-pixels. The dataset 11 will be made open-access and publicly hosted after the review period. 

## 4 YOLO training and technical evaluation 

We trained our detection models using the Ultralytics API. The results reported in this section correspond to our main configuration, namely YOLO26n with the default 640 ×640 input resolution and aspect-ratio-preserving letterboxing. This ensures that screenshots are rescaled without distortion. For comparison with prior work relying on YOLOv8-based detectors, we also report results obtained with a YOLOv8n-640 12 model. The effect of varying input resolution       

> 10 We call YOLO-pixels the geometric dimensions of each widget’s bounding box after the screenshot has been rescaled to YOLO’s default input size (640 ×X). Thus, it is the size that is meaningul in the widget detection context.
> 11 https://osf.io/fr6y4/overview
> 12 The YOLO taxonomy used in this paper is as follows: YOLOXy-z, where 𝑋 is the model version ( e.g. v8, 11, 26 etc. ), y is the model size ( e.g. n (nano), s (small), m (medium) etc. ), and z is the input resolution (640, 1280, 1920).

and YOLO model size, particularly for the detection of small UI elements and inference speed, is examined separately in §5.3. 

## 4.1 Dataset preparation and evaluation metrics 

4.1.1 Train/test/validation split. We split the 520 annotated images into three sets: Train 0 (80%, 416 images) used for hyperparameter tuning, Val 0 (10%, 52 images) reserved for validation during training, and Test (10%, 52 images) held out for final evaluation. All splits are stratified to preserve the distribution of GUI classes and platform categories (Windows, macOS, Ubuntu, Web) across subsets. 

4.1.2 Evaluation metrics. We used standard object detection evalua-tion metrics (more details are provided in §9.3) 

• IoU: Intersection over Union is used to evaluate a single object detection, and quantifies how much the detected bounding box overlaps with the true bounding box. An IoU of 0.5 means that the overlapping area is 50% of the union of both boxes. 

• F1-score combines precision (the proportion of predicted boxes that are correct) and recall (the proportion of ground truth boxes that are detected), balancing false positives and false negatives. 

• mAP@0.5 : The mean Average Precision at IoU ≥ 0.5 mea-sures the model’s overall ability to correctly detect objects. It is calculated as the area under the precision-recall curve, counting a prediction as correct when the bounding box has an IoU of at least 0.5 with the ground truth. 

• mAP@0.5:0.95 : The mean Average Precision averaged over IoU thresholds from 0.5 to 0.95 is the same except the metric is computed for increasing IoU, in steps of .05 from .5 to .95, and the average over all these mAP is then taken. This evaluates not only the model’s ability to find the objects, but also how accurately it places the bounding boxes. 

• mIoU is the mean Intersection over Union computed over all correctly matched detections (true positives). These metrics are all between 0 and 1, with 1 indicating the best performance. Throughout the paper, we follow the standard YOLO convention that a detection is counted as correct when IoU ≥ 0.5. 

## 4.2 Vanilla training (baseline model) 

To estimate the appropriate number of training epochs, we first conducted a baseline training run on the Train 0/Val 0 split without any hyperparameter tuning. We found performance did not show meaningful gains beyond 𝐸 = 500 epochs, which served as a reference for subsequent training. The loss and evaluation metrics over the course of training can be found in the supplementary materials. For hyperparameter tuning, we used YOLO’s built-in genetic algorithm-based optimizer, running 100 iterations over 150 epochs ( ≃E/3). 13 .This automated search explored both augmentation parameters ( e.g.       

> 13 We chose 150 epochs as a practical compromise: running each candidate for the full
> 𝐸 =500 epochs would be time-consuming, since the goal of tuning is to compare many configurations efficiently rather than fully train each one. Shorter runs ( e.g. 10–50 epochs) would not be sufficient because the model remains too unstable in the early training stages. Using around 150 epochs allows the model to stabilize enough to reveal meaningful differences between hyperparameter sets. For example, with these settings (150 epochs and 100 iterations) on an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU, 8-core CPU, and 16 GB RAM of our institution’s computing cluster, the process still took approximately 21 hours. Extending the tuning phase over several days (with more iterations) could yield further improvements. 4TargetFinder : Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces Preprint, HAL, 2026

Figure 1: Example of hand-labeled screenshots. Button 

> ToggleButton
> Hyperlink
> Text
> TextInput
> Slider
> Class
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> Number of examples per class (log scale)
> 11100
> 204
> 101
> 58
> 53
> 172
> 10449
> 243
> 94
> 63
> 144
> 97
> 5241
> 73
> 873
> 468
> 194
> 39
> 6650
> 682
> 575
> 18
> 248
> 80
> 33440
> 1202
> 1643
> 607
> 639
> 388
> linux
> mac
> web
> windows
> total

Figure 2: Class distribution by category. Note the logarithmic scale on the y-axis. 

mosaic, rotation etc. ) and internal YOLO configuration settings, including the classification loss weight, which influences the relative importance of class prediction within the total loss function, which is a key factor in handling class imbalance. To ensure that the selected hyperparameters did not overfit the initial split, we performed a 5-fold cross-validation with 𝐸 = 500 

epochs. In each fold, 80 % of the images were used for training and the remaining 20 % for validation, producing five distinct rotations of the 468 images. The results were consistent across folds, with low standard deviations (see supplementary materials). 

## 4.3 Final model evaluation and comparison to competing methods 

The final model was trained on the full 468-image training set (Train = Train 0 + Val 0) with the tuned hyperparameters. Its performance was then evaluated on the held-out 52-image Test set for multi-class ( i.e. 

bounding boxes with widget classification) and mono-class (bounding boxes only), and compared to the state of the art in widget detection: REMAUI [ 49 ] (the prototype 14 was originally made available by the authors, but is no longer publicly accessible; we therefore provide our own implementation) , UIED [ 61 , 62 ], MobileSAM [ 64 ] (no public implementation available; we provide our own implementation based on the released model under Ultralytics), Martínez-Rojas et al . ’s instantiation of YOLOv8n-640 [ 44 , 45 ], and OmniParser’s YOLO-based detector [42]. OmniParser uses YOLOv8n-640 in the original version presented in their paper, and a larger YOLO11m-1280 model in the more recent release, together with an OCR stage combined with the YOLO detections. Since the OCR stage substantially increases the number of false positives, we report here only the best-performing configuration for object detection, namely the YOLO11m-1280 detector alone (without OCR). A detailed analysis of all OmniParser variants is provided in the supplementary materials. The results are reported Table 1. Given that the compared methods output a varying number of classes, and some don’t return classes at all, comparisons are made based on mono-class performance. 

Mono-class vs. multi-class: our model achieves higher scores in mono-class mode (where a true positive is counted if the detection is spatially correct, regardless of the class) compared to multi-class                                                      

> 14 http://cseweb.uta.edu/~tuan/REMAUI/ 5Preprint, HAL, 2026 Ahmed Ben Akouche, Géry Casiez, Mathieu Nancel, and Julien Gori
> Table 1: Performance on the Test set. All performances are single-class evaluations except the one marked (MC). mAPs for REMAUI and UIED are not available since these methods do not return a confidence score associated with each bounding box, which is required to compute mAP scores. The best and best baseline scores are highlighted respectively in blue and light blue.
> Method Precision Recall F1 mAP@ 0.5 mAP@ 0.5:0.95 mIoU
> TargetFinder
> YOLO26n-640 (MC) 0.769 0.695 0.723 0.738 0.510 0.866
> YOLO26n-640 0.936 0.840 0.885 0.899 0.697 0.872 YOLOv8n-640 0.898 0.806 0.850 0.877 0.699 0.880 Baselines OmniParser (YOLO11m-1280) 0.753 0.651 0.698 0.693 0.391 0.787 REMAUI 0.430 0.484 0.455 N/A N/A 0.749 UIED 0.397 0.476 0.433 N/A N/A 0.753 MobileSAM 0.348 0.167 0.226 0.063 0.030 0.767 Martinez-Rojas (YOLOv8n-640) 0.276 0.181 0.218 0.093 0.029 0.684

mode (where the predicted class must also be correct), highlighting the impact of class imbalance. 

Comparison to other methods: We found that TargetFinder 

outperformed all baselines, even those using larger YOLO models. OmniParser is the strongest baseline; it is also the most recent work and its widget detection component was trained on a very large dataset compared to our model. In its best-performing configuration for object detection (YOLO11m-1280 without OCR), it reaches an F1 score of 0.698, compared to 0.885 for TargetFinder with YOLO26n-640 in mono-class mode and 0.850 with YOLOv8n-640. A detailed analysis of all its variants (YOLOv8n-640, YOLO11m-1280, with and without OCR, and OCR+fusion) is provided in the supplemen-tary materials. Although OmniParser relies on a larger YOLO variant and uses a higher input resolution (1280 ×1280) than TargetFinder ,making it about 7.5–9 × slower in our measurements, its performance remains below that of TargetFinder , even for very small targets (see Table 5 in Appendix §9.6). Omniparser’s underwhelming perfor-mance can be explained: the system is trained exclusively on ∼67k web screenshots annotated automatically from DOM metadata, with no evidence of human verification. Such automatically-generated labels inevitably contain errors (the OmniParser dataset is not pub-lic, but the examples shown in [ 42 ] already reveal labeling errors), and a model trained solely on web UIs does not transfer well to our test set, which includes native desktop environments (Ubuntu, macOS, Windows). This domain mismatch largely explains the lower performance. This observation aligns with the understanding that model performance depends not only on dataset size, but also on the diversity and quality of the data and training, and highlights that large datasets are not always required to obtain good performance. Fig. 3 illustrates the performances of our trained YOLO model compared with OmniParser’s YOLO and the ground truth, on an example screenshot from each OS. Comparison with other methods is provided in Fig. 14. Our method is visually close to the ground truth, with some errors remaining perceptible ( e.g. , the bounding boxes not well aligned on the browser suggestions/shortcuts, 1 st column) and appears superior to other methods, in line with the technical evaluation. OmniParser also performs better than the other methods, but still falls short of TargetFinder . On native desktop applications it misses numerous widgets (2 nd column) and occasionally produces false positives (3 rd column). Its relatively good performance on the browser example (1 st column) is expected, since this interface resembles the web domain on which OmniParser was exclusively trained. More detailed evaluations and analyses of all OmniParser variants including on web-screenshots only can be found in the Supplementary materials, which also include other labeled screenshot examples. 

## 4.4 Generalization to out-of-distribution data 

Given that our annotated dataset exclusively consists of modern desktop GUI screenshots of three specific OS’s, evaluating the final model solely on the corresponding test subset might lead to overly optimistic results. We thus evaluated the performance of 

TargetFinder through three experiments: (i) an evaluation on legacy desktop interfaces, which exhibit diverse visual themes and varying image resolutions, (ii) an evaluation on mobile interfaces, and (iii) an evaluation of cross-operating system transfer capabilities, in which models trained on one OS were tested on the two others. 

Legacy Software with Different Themes and Resolutions. We built a test set of 71 manually annotated screenshots from older software covering diverse themes (light, dark) and varying image resolutions, using WidgetAnnotator. The final YOLO26n-640 model, trained on the modern dataset, was evaluated on this legacy set. The results are summarized in Table 2 under the Legacy column. 

> Table 2: Performance on different interfaces (mono-class evaluation).

Metric Test-set Legacy Mobile (VINS) 

Precision 0.936 0.724 0.295 Recall 0.840 0.669 0.347 F1 0.885 0.695 0.319 mAP@0.5 0.899 0.717 0.201 mAP@0.5:0.95 0.697 0.445 0.089 mIoU 0.872 0.804 0.714 The model maintains reasonable performance across precision, recall, and F1, with relative drops of about 21%. The sharpest de-cline is observed for mAP@0.5:0.95, with a relative drop of about 36%, suggesting that performance deteriorates under stricter local-ization criteria while also reflecting a decrease in overall detection performance, as indicated by the drop in F1. However, the small drop in mIoU (only about 7%) suggests that, when detections are successfully matched, their spatial overlap with ground-truth objects remains relatively robust. 

Mobile Interfaces. Mobile UIs typically have layouts and design principles that differ significantly from desktop GUIs, so good transfer is a priori not expected. Still, given that desktop interfaces are generally more complex than mobile ones, it is plausible that transfer is possible, but only in the desktop-to-mobile direction. We thus evaluated the model on 100 mobile screenshots (Android and iPhone) sampled from the VINS dataset, reported under Mobile   

> 6TargetFinder : Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces Preprint, HAL, 2026

Ubuntu/Browser example macOs Example Windows 10 Example Ground truth Our YOLO26 OmniParser YOLO 

Figure 3: Visual comparison of widget detection outputs from our trained YOLO26n-640 model and OmniParser’s YOLO11m-1280 for three example screenshots: a Firefox browser window in Ubuntu (left), a macOs desktop with white background (middle) and a Windows desktop with blue background and a screensaver that can lead to false detections (right). 

(VINS) in Table 2. The drop in performance confirms that desktop-trained models do not generalize well to mobile UIs. Training on mobile data is thus essential to ensure reliable performance in mobile contexts. 

Cross-OS Transfer. A practical question of interest is whether the detection results transfer across modern interface themes; indeed, modern interfaces tend to share many similarities since they are often based on the same heuristics of design 15 . To investigate this, we trained YOLO26n-640 models individually on the Windows-, Ubuntu-, and macOS-only images of our dataset, and evaluated their performance across the other OSs. Each OS-specific dataset comprises 130 images, divided into 80% training, 10% validation, and 10% test subsets. All training used the default YOLO hyperparameters pre-configured for the COCO dataset [40], with a maximum of 500 epochs, providing a consistent baseline for comparison. The results, summarized in Table 3, show that cross-OS transfer clearly exhibits performance declines, particularly when transferring models from macOS or Linux to Windows. Overall, performance is highest for the MacOS(train)/MacOS(test) pair, suggesting that the MacOS interface exhibits less diversity across our dataset. Finally, in many cases, F1 scores and mIoU remain decent; this suggests that, while models trained on a single OS can partially generalize to other platforms for some practical applications, fine-tuning or additional retraining with target-specific data will enhance results significantly.   

> 15 See e.g. Jakob Nielsen’s 10 heuristics of design: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/.

Table 3: Cross-OS transfer performance (mono-class evaluation). Training Testing Precision Recall F1-score mAP@ 0.5 mAP@ 0.5:0.95 mIoU                                                                

> Windows Windows 0.807 0.643 0.716 0.725 0.473 0.827 Windows Ubuntu 0.666 0.576 0.618 0.634 0.324 0.751 Windows macOS 0.801 0.710 0.753 0.779 0.350 0.736 Ubuntu Ubuntu 0.868 0.791 0.828 0.852 0.561 0.819 Ubuntu Windows 0.472 0.362 0.410 0.339 0.130 0.722 Ubuntu macOS 0.645 0.670 0.657 0.644 0.303 0.751 macOS macOS 0.955 0.931 0.943 0.973 0.802 0.901 macOS Ubuntu 0.561 0.555 0.558 0.525 0.199 0.696 macOS Windows 0.571 0.380 0.457 0.387 0.131 0.689

## 5 Identifying Small widgets 

Small widgets are common in GUI’s, including in our dataset (see Fig. 4). They are usually hard to detect, and small object detection remains an active research topic [ 58 ]. In this section, we first charac-terize the prevalence of small widgets in our dataset, and then apply and evaluate several methods to enhance their detection. 

## 5.1 Distribution of widget sizes in our dataset and performance on small elements 

To characterize the presence of small UI elements in our dataset, we computed the distribution of widget sizes after letterboxing  

> 7Preprint, HAL, 2026 Ahmed Ben Akouche, Géry Casiez, Mathieu Nancel, and Julien Gori

as the minimum between widget width and height, expressed in “YOLO-pixels” 16 , see Fig. 4. 10 0 10 1 10 2

> Bounding box min side (YOLO-px, log scale)
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Number of occurrences (log scale)  10th percentile (D1): 5.50 YOLO-px
> 30th percentile (D3): 8.00 YOLO-px
> 50th percentile: 9.11 YOLO-px

Figure 4: Distribution of widget sizes in YOLO-pixels (logarithmic scale), when a network with input resolution of 640 ×640 is used. Vertical lines indicate the 50th, 30th, and 10th percentiles. 

The performance of TargetFinder was evaluated separately for widgets whose YOLO-pixel size falls below the 50th, 30th, and 10th percentiles (see Table 7 in Appendix 9.6), and found that, in line with the literature, smaller widgets were increasingly difficult to detect, as reflected by the higher false-negative rates (lower recall). The best baseline, OmniParser, suffers from a similar decrease of recall (see Table 5 in Appendix §9.6). REMAUI also exhibits a clear drop in performance across percentiles (see Table 6 in Appendix 9.6), although in this case the degradation appears to affect precision more strongly than recall. 

## 5.2 Enhancing performance for small widgets 

We evaluated several methods for improving performance for small widgets. The performances of all relevant YOLO variations, evaluated on the 10 th percentile and on mAP@0.5:0.95, are provided in Fig. 5. (1) Specific small-widget training brings marginal to no im-provements. We experimented with several fine tunings of hyperparameters and YOLO augmentations, as well as train-ing with a curated dataset of images containing many small widgets, but found almost no gain in performance, as reported in the Supplementary materials. The problem is that small targets become almost invisible, deep in the CNN-backbone of the YOLO network. For example, a widget of size 5.5 YOLO-pixels becomes sub-pixel in deeper feature maps ( ≈0.34 pixels at stride 16). (2) Specific YOLO architecture. The YOLO family offers vari-ous model sizes, denoted n (nano), s (small), m (medium), l (large), and x (extra-large). We fine-tuned models of different sizes and found sizeable gains in detection performance, but at the cost of inference time. Other changes to the YOLO architecture have been reported in the literature. For example, YOLO uses information from multiple convolutional layers for detection (feature pyramids [ 39 ]). YOLO does not use the P2 layer, which is the layer with the highest resolution i.e.  

> 16 After resizing each screenshot to 640 ×X while preserving aspect ratio, letterboxing adds padding to obtain the final 640 ×640 input resolution. “YOLO-pixels” do not correspond to physical image pixels, but represent the bounding box’s dimension after
> resizing. This implies that YOLO-pixels are floats.

the one most suited to capture information related to small widgets. We experimented with an undocumented YOLO ar-chitecture that exploits the P2 layer, but found at best marginal improvements, reported in the supplementary materials. 17 

Other works also suggest changing the loss function during training, moving away from IoU since it becomes very sensi-tive for small targets, but reported improvements appear even smaller [51, Table 4]. (3) Increasing the input resolution is a simple yet very effective method to increase performance on small widgets: doubling the resolution doubles the size of the objects represented inside the CNN-backbone. We provide YOLO models trained and evaluated at different input resolutions, including 640 ×640, 1280 ×1280, 1920 ×1920. (4) In Slicing Aided Hyper Inference (SAHI) the image is cut into overlapping patches. Each patch is fed to a YOLO network, after which the detection results are fused. The advantage is that downscaling the initial image is not necessary anymore, and the extra time needed to run the extra forward inference passes on YOLO can, in theory, be negated by running these in parallel. We indeed found a gain in performance, but at a higher temporal cost than expected. We gained further performance by training the networks on patches rather than on full images. 

## 5.3 Performance tradeoffs 

Our evaluations of the different YOLO models reveal that 1) larger models (parameters and input resolution) deliver higher accuracy at the expense of slower inference speeds 2) SAHI provides some gains in performance but for a large increase in inference time 3) A variety of other methods can bring marginal gains in performance. From a practical perspective, the choice of a particular version of the model should be made based on the inference speed requirements. For the use cases presented next, a 200 ms inference time is acceptable, which, with the hardware used to create the Fig. 5 benchmark, suggests using the 𝑠 × 1920 model. The supplementary materials reports benchmarks for different hardware setups, including high- to low-end CPUs, and a consumer-grade GPU. 

## 6 TargetFinder 

## 6.1 System description and technical evaluation 

TargetFinder continuously captures full-screen screenshots at 30Hz 18 with a cross-platform screenshot library optimized for speed called mss 19 . To avoid redundant YOLO inferences when the UI remains static and save computational resources, TargetFinder 

integrates a change detection mechanism. After each screen capture, a downscaled grayscale version of the current frame is compared to the previous one. If the pixel difference exceeds a configurable      

> 17 The untrained model can be found at https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics/blob/ main/ultralytics/cfg/models/26/yolo26-p2.yaml. Previous work shows that adding P2 can bring small improvements to detection, e.g. an increase of .04 points in MAP@0.5:0.95 in [ 51 , Table 3], but requires training YOLO from scratch. An alternative, which we considered instead, is to transfer the weights from a previously pre-trained YOLO without P2 and learn the remaining weights by fine-tuning.
> 18 This parameter can be increased on powerful machines.
> 19 https://pypi.org/project/mss/ 8TargetFinder : Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces Preprint, HAL, 2026

Figure 5: Performance comparison for different YOLO architectures for small targets (10th percentile). The reported SAHI benchmark uses YOLO26n-640. Inference time is given for a Macbook Pro (2023) with M3 Max chipset (14 cores), 36 GB RAM, no dedicated GPU. 

threshold, a new inference is triggered using our trained model; otherwise, the inference step is skipped. YOLO inference is configurable through confidence and IoU thresholds. The default confidence threshold is chosen to maximize the F1-score, but can be adjusted to favor precision (fewer false posi-tives but more missed detections) or recall (fewer missed detections but more false positives). The IoU threshold is also adjustable: lower values eliminate overlapping boxes more to reduce duplicates via non-maximum suppression. The detection runs in a separate thread, ensuring that bounding boxes are updated in real time. Each detection is primarily represented by a dictionary {id, x, y, width, height, score, class_id, class_name} 20 , ready to be exploited by downstream modules. Optionally, the library can also provide the cropped image of each detected widget, which can be useful for further processing such as OCR or custom classification. In practice, the speed of TargetFinder 

depends mainly on the YOLO inference latency and on the cost of the change detection operation. On a Macbook Pro 2023, with a M3 Max chipset (14 cores), 36 GB RAM, the system reaches 10–24 FPS for real-time detection, depending on whether the interface is static or dynamically changing, with CPU usage ranging from 4% (static UI) to 7% (dynamic inference) and RAM usage 390–470 MB. 

## 6.2 Toolkit 

The TargetFinder library, provided as supplementary material, manages screen capture, low-resolution change detection, and YOLO inference. The library can be imported into any Python applica-tion to retrieve real-time bounding boxes of visible interface wid-gets. It exposes configurable parameters such as loop frequency, change-detection threshold, YOLO confidence, and IoU threshold for non-max suppression. Upon detection of a change, the library provides a callback mechanism to notify the application, providing information about the detected changes (id, position, dimensions, class, confidence score and screen capture of each widget). We             

> 20 xand yare the top-left coordinates of the bounding box; wand hits width and height;
> score the confidence in [0,1]; and class_id the class label.

also provide all fine-tuned YOLO models considered in this work, allowing end-users to navigate the mAP@0.5:0.95/inference time tradeoff. The detection pipeline is designed to be platform-agnostic. However, overlay rendering using Qt6 and mouse control (used in Bubble Cursor and Semantic Pointing) rely on system-level APIs that differ between operating systems. These components have been validated on Windows and Ubuntu (X11 sessions). Wayland 21 is not currently supported due to limitations in available screen capture libraries, and adaptations are necessary on macOS. We now present two demonstrations of the functionality enabled by 

TargetFinder , showing how it allows a system-wide implementation of two existing target-aware pointing facilitation techniques. The techniques are illustrated on an Ubuntu 24.04 system. Videos of the systems working in real-time and system-wide are available in the supplementary materials, as well as further details on the technical solutions used. 

## 6.3 Illustration in bubble cursor 

We implemented the Bubble Cursor using TargetFinder , following the algorithm described by Grossman and Balakrishnan [ 26 ] which continuously adjusts the cursor’s radius to select only the closest target inside the active area. To display the bubble cursor (see Fig. 6-b for an example), we use a PyQt overlay while completely hiding the system cursor using low-level system functions 22 . This overlay is updated every 10 ms. When the user clicks, the system automatically redirects the hidden pointer to the center of the nearest widget using the pyautogui 23 library to simulate a click, then moves the pointer back to its original location to ensure that the interaction remains smooth. 

## 6.4 Illustration in semantic pointing 

Semantic pointing [ 11 ] dynamically adjusts the control-display ra-tio [ 14 ] (C/D), based on how close the cursor is to nearby targets. Decreasing the C/D ratio when the cursor is near or within a target causes the cursor to slow down, meaning the user must move their hand farther to traverse the same number of pixels, which enlarges the target in motor space while keeping its appearance in visual space unchanged. To implement Semantic pointing, as in the Bubble Cursor implementation, we fully hide the system cursor and render a fake cursor using PyQt, refreshing every 10 ms. We apply the spatial scaling function as defined in the original work by Blanch et al . [11 ], parametrized by the semantic importance 𝑆 𝑖 : for 𝑆 𝑖 < 1,the cursor moves faster, and the widget appears smaller in motor space; conversely for 𝑆 > 1, the cursor moves slower and the widget appears larger in motor space. Fig. 6-c illustrates 24 the bounding box of a target in visual space as determined by TargetFinder (green), and the associated size in motor space with the semantic pointing technique (red, dashed) for 𝑆 𝑖 = 2.      

> 21 https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Wayland
> 22 We used the Python ctypes library. Although PyQt can hide the system cursor, in practice, due to conflicts between screen capture, overlay refresh, and click handling, we chose to hide the system cursor entirely for robustness. More details on our engineering choices are provided in the supplementary materials.
> 23 https://pypi.org/project/PyAutoGUI/
> 24 This additional visual layer can be displayed with the –display option in our implementation, but by default the size in motor space is hidden, and the technique is visually imperceptible to users. 9Preprint, HAL, 2026 Ahmed Ben Akouche, Géry Casiez, Mathieu Nancel, and Julien Gori
> (a) Example of detected widgets by TargetFinder .
> (b) Example of the Bubble Cursor overlay during real-time use.
> (c) Example of semantic pointing with visual feedback about the motor space displayed.
> Figure 6: TargetFinder and system-wide implementations of BubbleCursor and SemanticPointing illustrated.

## 7 Limitations 

Limited number of widget classes. We considered 6 classes in the current implementation of TargetFinder , but prior work has generally used more, e.g. 27 in [ 45 ]. Considering that our intended applications do not actually require knowing the type of widget being targeted, and given that performance comparisons with existing techniques are necessarily mono-class, we opted for a limited number of high-level classes. It should also be noted that a universal set of classes does not exist: for example, OS-Atlas uses 34 classes for Linux and 24 for Mac OS [ 60 ]. Another example is in Fig. 11, where it is not obvious whether the DatePicker widget should be classified as Button , a Text field , or a class on its own. Further, the choice of classes is dependent on the application; for example the authors of semantic pointing describe how they reduced the motor space of the [ Don’t save ] button but increased the motor space of the [ Save ]button. Thus, a class-aware version of semantic pointing would not consider a Button class so much as classes of recovery-from-error costs. We addressed this limitation in two ways: first, we elected to facilitate the relabeling of widget classes as much as possible by releasing our annotation tool, which is easily extendable to more classes. Second, TargetFinder optionally provides a screenshot of each widget alongside geometric information, allowing further downstream classification e.g. based on OCR [38]. 

Limitations of TargetFinder in practice. TargetFinder currently does not identify hierarchies of widgets, such as the fact that the close tab icon belongs to the tab button, nor does it return entire windows, which are sometimes the target of users wanting to deselect or switch focus. These cases are likely better treated with extra post-processing, rather than by adding specific classes such as window or 

compounded widget . For instance, if a click occurred on an identified target, re-running YOLO within the bounding box of the widget to see if other sub-widgets are found within; and if not, analyzing the whole image looking specifically for windows. 

Dataset size. Our dataset contains more than 42,000 annotations from about 600 screenshots, far from OmniParser’s training set, which has more than 60k screenshots. Yet, thanks to manual labeling and inclusion of desktop screenshots, TargetFinder outperforms OmniParser. This result reinforces that the quality of the data is essential [ 28 , 56 ]. That being said, further performance enhancements can likely be gained by increasing the size of training set. 

Real-time performance. The end-to-end latency of our system is about 200 ms. While this may seem like a large delay, considering the effect that latency has on pointing performance when evaluated by Fitts’ law [ 30 ], this processing delay is not equivalent to adding a constant latency to the pointer: it only affects the brief moment immediately after an interface change (e.g., when a new window is opened), during which the widget information cannot be exploited. Still, since inference time can be traded-off for precision and recall (see §5), it remains an important concern. 

## 8 Conclusion and Future Work 

This work introduces TargetFinder , a real-time, computer vision-based library for identifying GUI widgets across desktop environ-ments. Unlike traditional approaches that rely on accessibility APIs or application-specific access, TargetFinder operates independently of platform internals, enabling system-wide widget detection. To support this, we compiled a novel dataset of 520 annotated screen-shots spanning multiple OSes and interface types. We fine-tuned multiple YOLO object detection models, of various sizes and input resolution, on this dataset, achieving significantly higher widget detection accuracy compared to existing methods. Finally, we il-lustrate the immediate applicability of TargetFinder by enabling two classic target-aware pointing techniques, Bubble Cursor and Semantic Pointing, as drop-in enhancements on standard Windows systems. Each of these contributions (annotation tool, annotated dataset, trained models, TargetFinder and pointing techniques code) are made publicly available. These contributions pave the way for wider deployment of advanced interaction techniques without requiring cooperation from application developers or access to source code. Our findings also shed light on the generalization capabilities of object detection methods in desktop GUIs, showing the importance of including images from various OS’s and themes in the training set. Apart from building target-aware interaction techniques, we see two other avenues for future work with TargetFinder :

• Ecological (or “in the wild”) studies of interaction, that evalu-ate pointing behavior in realistic environments. TargetFinder 

should facilitate the validation of established models like Fitts’ Law in real-world contexts [ 16 ], ecological compar-isons between interaction techniques, and tuning of pointing facilitation mechanisms [37]. 

> 10

TargetFinder : Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces Preprint, HAL, 2026 

• As highlighted §2.3, many applications implement accessi-bility APIs incompletely or incorrectly, creating barriers for assistive technologies. Reliable spatial and semantic infor-mation about interface widgets provided by tools such as 

TargetFinder could contribute to more robust screen read-ers, magnification tools, or alternative input methods that can operate independently of developer-provided accessibility metadata. 

## Acknowledgments 

Thanks to Fabio Matti, Ludovico Novelli and Rosie Frost for insightful private discussions. This work was partially funded by ANR-24-CE33-7994-01 HCIMI. 

## References 

[1] 2020. Microsoft Active Accessibility. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/ win32/winauto/microsoft-active-accessibility. Accessed: 2025-09-10. [2] 2020. Waltteri Desktop UI Dataset. https://github.com/waltteri/desktop-ui-dataset. Accessed: 2025-09-10. [3] 2021. Microsoft UI Automation. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/ win32/winauto/entry-uiauto-win32. Accessed: 2025-09-10. [4] Mehmet Dogan Altinbas and Tacha Serif. 2022. GUI Element Detection from Mobile UI Images Using YOLOv5. In Mobile Web and Intelligent Information Systems: 18th International Conference, MobiWIS 2022, Rome, Italy, August 22–24, 2022, Proceedings (Rome, Italy). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 32–45. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-14391-5_3 [5] Takeshi Asano, Ehud Sharlin, Yoshifumi Kitamura, Kazuki Takashima, and Fumio Kishino. 2005. Predictive interaction using the delphian desktop. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 

(Seattle, WA, USA) (UIST ’05) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 133–141. doi:10.1145/1095034.1095058 [6] Chongyang Bai, Xiaoxue Zang, Ying Xu, Srinivas Sunkara, Abhinav Rastogi, Jindong Chen, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas. 2021. UIBert: Learning Generic Multimodal Representations for UI Understanding. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21 , Zhi-Hua Zhou (Ed.). International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 1705–1712. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2021/235 Main Track. [7] Patrick Baudisch, Edward Cutrell, Mary Czerwinski, Daniel C Robbins, Peter Tandler, Benjamin B Bederson, and Alex Zierlinger. 2003. Drag-and-Pop and Drag-and-Pick: Techniques for Accessing Remote Screen Content on Touch-and Pen-Operated Systems.. In Interact , Vol. 3. Citeseer, 57–64. [8] Daniel Baulé, Christiane Gresse von Wangenheim, Aldo Von Wangenheim, and Jean Hauck. 2020. Recent Progress in Automated Code Generation from GUI Im-ages Using Machine Learning Techniques. JUCS - Journal of Universal Computer Science 26, 9 (2020), 1095–1127. arXiv:https://doi.org/10.3897/jucs.2020.058 doi:10.3897/jucs.2020.058 [9] Tony Beltramelli. 2018. pix2code: Generating Code from a Graphical User Interface Screenshot. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Inter-active Computing Systems (Paris, France) (EICS ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 3, 6 pages. doi:10.1145/3220134.3220135 [10] Tingting Bi, Xin Xia, David Lo, John Grundy, Thomas Zimmermann, and Denae Ford. 2022. Accessibility in Software Practice: A Practitioner’s Perspective. 

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 31, 4, Article 66 (July 2022), 26 pages. doi:10.1145/3503508 [11] Renaud Blanch, Yves Guiard, and Michel Beaudouin-Lafon. 2004. Semantic pointing: improving target acquisition with control-display ratio adaptation. In 

Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Vienna, Austria) (CHI ’04) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 519–526. doi:10.1145/985692.985758 [12] Sara Bunian, Kai Li, Chaima Jemmali, Casper Harteveld, Yun Fu, and Magy Seif Seif El-Nasr. 2021. VINS: Visual Search for Mobile User Interface Design. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 423, 14 pages. doi:10.1145/3411764.3445762 [13] John Canny. 1986. A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence PAMI-8 (12 1986), 679–698. doi:10. 1109/TPAMI.1986.4767851 [14] Géry Casiez and Nicolas Roussel. 2011. No more bricolage! methods and tools to characterize, replicate and compare pointing transfer functions. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Santa Barbara, California, USA) (UIST ’11) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 603–614. doi:10.1145/2047196.2047276 [15] Olivier Chapuis. 2005. Gestion des fenêtres : enregistrement et visualisation de l’interaction. In IHM ’05: Proceedings of the 17th international conference of the Association Francophone d’Interaction Homme-Machine . Toulouse, France, 255–258. doi:10.1145/1148550.1148590 [16] Olivier Chapuis, Renaud Blanch, and Michel Beaudouin-Lafon. 2007. Fitts’ Law in the Wild: A Field Study of Aimed Movements . Technical Report. https: //hal.science/hal-00612026 LRI Technical Repport Number 1480, Univ. Paris-Sud, 11 pages.. [17] Olivier Chapuis, Jean-Baptiste Labrune, and Emmanuel Pietriga. 2009. DynaSpot: speed-dependent area cursor. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA) (CHI ’09) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1391–1400. doi:10.1145/1518701. 1518911 [18] Jieshan Chen, Mulong Xie, Zhenchang Xing, Chunyang Chen, Xiwei Xu, Liming Zhu, and Guoqiang Li. 2020. Object detection for graphical user interface: old fashioned or deep learning or a combination?. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Virtual Event, USA) (ESEC/FSE 2020) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1202–1214. doi:10.1145/3368089.3409691 [19] Biplab Deka, Zifeng Huang, Chad Franzen, Joshua Hibschman, Daniel Afergan, Yang Li, Jeffrey Nichols, and Ranjitha Kumar. 2017. Rico: A Mobile App Dataset for Building Data-Driven Design Applications. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Québec City, QC, Canada) (UIST ’17) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 845–854. doi:10.1145/3126594.3126651 [20] Morgan Dixon and James Fogarty. 2010. Prefab: implementing advanced behaviors using pixel-based reverse engineering of interface structure. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1525–1534. [21] Morgan Dixon, James Fogarty, and Jacob Wobbrock. 2012. A general-purpose target-aware pointing enhancement using pixel-level analysis of graphical interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .3167–3176. [22] Abigail Evans and Jacob Wobbrock. 2012. Taming wild behavior: the input observer for obtaining text entry and mouse pointing measures from everyday computer use. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Austin, Texas, USA) (CHI ’12) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1947–1956. doi:10.1145/2207676.2208338 [23] Leah Findlater, Alex Jansen, Kristen Shinohara, Morgan Dixon, Peter Kamb, Joshua Rakita, and Jacob O. Wobbrock. 2010. Enhanced area cursors: reducing fine pointing demands for people with motor impairments. In Proceedings of the 23nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (New York, New York, USA) (UIST ’10) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 153–162. doi:10.1145/1866029.1866055 [24] Krzysztof Gajos, Katharina Reinecke, and Charles Herrmann. 2012. Accurate measurements of pointing performance from in situ observations. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Austin, Texas, USA) (CHI ’12) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3157–3166. doi:10.1145/2207676.2208733 [25] Julien Gori and Olivier Rioul. 2019. Regression to a linear lower bound with outliers: An exponentially modified Gaussian noise model. In 2019 27th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO) . IEEE, 1–5. [26] Tovi Grossman and Ravin Balakrishnan. 2005. The bubble cursor: enhancing target acquisition by dynamic resizing of the cursor’s activation area. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Portland, Oregon, USA) (CHI ’05) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 281–290. doi:10.1145/1054972.1055012 [27] Yves Guiard, Renaud Blanch, and Michel Beaudouin-Lafon. 2004. Object point-ing: a complement to bitmap pointing in GUIs. In Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2004 (London, Ontario, Canada) (GI ’04) . Canadian Human-Computer Communications Society, Waterloo, CAN, 9–16. [28] Alon Halevy, Peter Norvig, and Fernando Pereira. 2009. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data. IEEE Intelligent Systems 24, 2 (2009), 8–12. doi:10.1109/ MIS.2009.36 [29] Morten Hertzum and Kasper Hornbæk. 2007. Input techniques that dynamically change their cursor activation area: A comparison of bubble and cell cursors. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 65, 10 (Oct. 2007), 833–851. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2007.05.001 [30] Errol R Hoffmann. 1992. Fitts’ law with transmission delay. Ergonomics 35, 1 (1992), 37–48. [31] Zheng Hui, Yinheng Li, Dan zhao, Tianyi Chen, Colby Banbury, and Kazuhito Koishida. 2025. WinClick: GUI Grounding with Multimodal Large Language Models. arXiv:2503.04730 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04730 [32] Amy Hurst, Scott E. Hudson, and Jennifer Mankoff. 2007. Dynamic detection of novice vs. skilled use without a task model. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA) 

(CHI ’07) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 271–280. doi:10.1145/1240624.1240669 11 Preprint, HAL, 2026 Ahmed Ben Akouche, Géry Casiez, Mathieu Nancel, and Julien Gori 

[33] Amy Hurst, Scott E. Hudson, and Jennifer Mankoff. 2010. Automatically identifying targets users interact with during real world tasks. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Hong Kong, China) 

(IUI ’10) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 11–20. doi:10.1145/1719970.1719973 [34] Alex Jansen, Leah Findlater, and Jacob O. Wobbrock. 2011. From the lab to the world: lessons from extending a pointing technique for real-world use. In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI EA ’11) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1867–1872. doi:10.1145/1979742.1979888 [35] Paul Kabbash and William A. S. Buxton. 1995. The “prince” technique: Fitts’ law and selection using area cursors. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’95) .ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., USA, 273–279. doi:10.1145/223904. 223939 [36] Raghav Kapoor, Yash Parag Butala, Melisa Russak, Jing Yu Koh, Kiran Kamble, Waseem AlShikh, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2025. OmniACT: A Dataset and Benchmark for Enabling Multimodal Generalist Autonomous Agents for Desktop and Web. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 , Aleš Leonardis, Elisa Ricci, Stefan Roth, Olga Russakovsky, Torsten Sattler, and Gül Varol (Eds.). Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 161–178. [37] Byungjoo Lee, Mathieu Nancel, Sunjun Kim, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2020. Au-toGain: Gain Function Adaptation with Submovement Efficiency Optimization. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. doi:10.1145/3313831.3376244 [38] Minghao Li, Tengchao Lv, Jingye Chen, Lei Cui, Yijuan Lu, Dinei Florencio, Cha Zhang, Zhoujun Li, and Furu Wei. 2023. Trocr: Transformer-based optical character recognition with pre-trained models. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , Vol. 37. 13094–13102. [39] Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge Belongie. 2017. Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition .2117–2125. [40] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2014 , David Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 740–755. [41] Wanyu Liu, Rafael Lucas D’Oliveira, Michel Beaudouin-Lafon, and Olivier Rioul. 2017. BIGnav: Bayesian Information Gain for Guiding Multiscale Navigation. In 

Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 5869–5880. doi:10.1145/3025453.3025524 [42] Yadong Lu, Jianwei Yang, Yelong Shen, and Ahmed Awadallah. 2024. OmniParser for Pure Vision Based GUI Agent. arXiv:2408.00203 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/ abs/2408.00203 [43] Sylvain Malacria, Joey Scarr, Andy Cockburn, Carl Gutwin, and Tovi Grossman. 2013. Skillometers: reflective widgets that motivate and help users to improve performance. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (St. Andrews, Scotland, United Kingdom) 

(UIST ’13) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 321–330. doi:10.1145/2501988.2501996 [44] A. Martínez-Rojas, A. Rodríguez-Ruíz, J. G. Enríquez, and A. Jiménez-Ramírez. 2024. uidetection: Implementation of Screen2SOM (YOLOv8). https://github. com/RPA-US/uidetection/. Accessed: 2025-09-10. [45] A. Martínez-Rojas, A. Rodríguez-Ruíz, J. G. Enríquez, and A. Jiménez-Ramírez. 2024. What’s Behind the Screen? Unveiling UI Hierarchies in Process-Related UI Logs. In Business Process Management: 22nd International Conference, BPM 2024, Krakow, Poland, September 1–6, 2024, Proceedings (Krakow, Poland). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 256–272. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-70396-6_15 [46] Fabio Matti, Pierre Dillenbourg, and Ludovico Novelli. 2023. A Click Ahead: Real-Time Forecasting of Keyboard and Mouse Actions using RNNs and Computer Vision. arXiv:2309.12170 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.12170 [47] Michael McGuffin and Ravin Balakrishnan. 2002. Acquisition of expanding targets. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) (CHI ’02) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 57–64. doi:10.1145/503376.503388 [48] Shravan Nayak, Xiangru Jian, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Juan A. Rodriguez, Montek Kalsi, Nicolas Chapados, M. Tamer Özsu, Aishwarya Agrawal, David Vazquez, Christopher Pal, Perouz Taslakian, Spandana Gella, and Sai Rajeswar. 2025. UI-Vision: A Desktop-centric GUI Benchmark for Visual Perception and Interaction. In 

Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning . https://openreview. net/forum?id=5Rtj4mYH1C [49] Tuan Anh Nguyen and Christoph Csallner. 2015. Reverse Engineering Mobile Application User Interfaces with REMAUI (T). In 2015 30th IEEE/ACM In-ternational Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . 248–259. doi:10.1109/ASE.2015.32 [50] Rohan Patel, Pedro Breton, Catherine M. Baker, Yasmine N. El-Glaly, and Kristen Shinohara. 2020. Why Software is Not Accessible: Technology Professionals’ Perspectives and Challenges. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI EA ’20) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–9. doi:10.1145/ 3334480.3383103 [51] Ji Qiu, Wenbo Zhang, Siyuan Xu, and Huiyu Zhou. 2025. DP-YOLO: A lightweight traffic sign detection model for small object detection. Digital Signal Processing 

165 (2025), 105311. [52] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junting Pan, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollar, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. 2025. SAM 2: Segment Anything in Images and Videos. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ha6RTeWMd0 [53] Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. 2016. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . https://www.cv-foundation.org/openaccess/content_cvpr_2016/papers/ Redmon_You_Only_Look_CVPR_2016_paper.pdf [54] Tezan Sahu. 2020. Smart UI Detector. https://github.com/tezansahu/smart_ui_tf20. Accessed: 2025-09-10. [55] Xiaojun Su, Oscar Kin-Chung Au, and Rynson W.H. Lau. 2014. The implicit fan cursor: a velocity dependent area cursor. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) 

(CHI ’14) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 753–762. doi:10.1145/2556288.2557095 [56] Richard Sutton. 2019. The bitter lesson. http://www.incompleteideas.net/IncIdeas/ BitterLesson.html. Accessed: 2025-09-10. [57] Amanda Swearngin and Yang Li. 2019. Modeling Mobile Interface Tappability Using Crowdsourcing and Deep Learning. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) 

(CHI ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. doi:10.1145/3290605.3300305 [58] Jinwang Wang, Chang Xu, Wen Yang, and Lei Yu. 2021. A normalized Gaussian Wasserstein distance for tiny object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13389 

(2021). [59] Aileen Worden, Nef Walker, Krishna Bharat, and Scott Hudson. 1997. Making computers easier for older adults to use: area cursors and sticky icons. In Proceed-ings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Atlanta, Georgia, USA) (CHI ’97) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 266–271. doi:10.1145/258549.258724 [60] Zhiyong Wu, Zhenyu Wu, Fangzhi Xu, Yian Wang, Qiushi Sun, Chengyou Jia, Kanzhi Cheng, Zichen Ding, Liheng Chen, Paul Pu Liang, and Yu Qiao. 2025. OS-ATLAS: Foundation Action Model for Generalist GUI Agents. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations . https: //openreview.net/forum?id=n9PDaFNi8t [61] Mulong Xie, Sidong Feng, Zhenchang Xing, Jieshan Chen, and Chunyang Chen. 2020. UIED: a hybrid tool for GUI element detection. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Virtual Event, USA) 

(ESEC/FSE 2020) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1655–1659. doi:10.1145/3368089.3417940 [62] Mulong Xie, Sidong Feng, Zhenchang Xing, Jieshan Chen, and Chunyang Chen. 2020. UIED: User Interface Element Detection. https://github.com/MulongXie/ UIED. Accessed: 2025-09-10. [63] Shumin Zhai, Stéphane Conversy, Michel Beaudouin-Lafon, and Yves Guiard. 2003. Human on-line response to target expansion. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA) (CHI ’03) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 177–184. doi:10.1145/642611.642644 [64] Chaoning Zhang, Dongshen Han, Yu Qiao, Jung Uk Kim, Sung-Ho Bae, Seungkyu Lee, and Choong Seon Hong. 2023. Faster Segment Anything: Towards Lightweight SAM for Mobile Applications. arXiv:2306.14289 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2306.14289 [65] Xiaoyi Zhang, Lilian de Greef, Amanda Swearngin, Samuel White, Kyle Murray, Lisa Yu, Qi Shan, Jeffrey Nichols, Jason Wu, Chris Fleizach, Aaron Everitt, and Jeffrey P Bigham. 2021. Screen Recognition: Creating Accessibility Metadata for Mobile Applications from Pixels. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 275, 15 pages. doi:10. 1145/3411764.3445186 [66] Junda Zhu, Jun Ai, Tao Shi, Congran Zhang, and Xinyue Wu. 2023. An Intelligent Labeling and Dataset Generating Method for Desktop Application Element Object Detection. In 2023 10th International Conference on Dependable Systems and Their Applications (DSA) . 860–869. doi:10.1109/DSA59317.2023.00121 12 TargetFinder : Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces Preprint, HAL, 2026     

> [67] Brian Ziebart, Anind Dey, and J. Andrew Bagnell. 2012. Probabilistic pointing target prediction via inverse optimal control. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Lisbon, Portugal) (IUI ’12) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. doi:10. 1145/2166966.2166968

## 9 Appendices 9.1 Semi-automatic annotation tool 

Figure 7: Screenshot of the semi-automatic annotation tool WidgetAnno-tator. The user selects a pre-labeling method ( UI Elements Detection ), adjusts the parameters of the method with real-time feedback, and cor-rects or draws bounding boxes directly on the screenshot using interactive options. 

## 9.2 GUI element types 

List of GUI widgets: (1) The ToggleButton class includes all binary state controls such as checkboxes, switches, and radio buttons. 

Figure 8: Example of annotated ToggleButtons. 

(2) The TextInput class covers interactive fields that allow users to enter text when selected, such as form inputs or search bars. 

Figure 9: Example of annotated TextInput fields. 

(3) The Slider class refers to sliding controls like volume adjusters or scrollbars; in such cases, we annotate the entire track along which the slider moves, excluding any side buttons, which are labeled as Button .

Figure 10: Example of annotated slider. 

(4) The Text class covers regions containing textual content such as paragraphs, code blocks, or documentation. We do not annotate isolated short words unless they are visually em-phasized ( e.g. large headings) or grouped together, to avoid confusion with single-word buttons. (5) The Hyperlink class is restricted to clickable text contained within a Text block, in order to distinguish it from single-word clickable buttons. 

Figure 11: Example of annotated hyperlinks and text blocks. 

(6) The Button class encompasses all other clickable components not included in the previous categories, such as dropdown triggers, tabs, or general-purpose buttons.  

> 13 Preprint, HAL, 2026 Ahmed Ben Akouche, Géry Casiez, Mathieu Nancel, and Julien Gori

Figure 12: Example of various annotated buttons. 

## 9.3 Evaluation metrics for object detection 

The evaluation metrics commonly used in the object detection literature are: (1) Intersection over Union (IoU) : This is the ratio between the number of pixels in the intersection of the ground truth object and the predicted object (true positive), and the number of pixels in their union. It measures the localization and size quality of the bounding boxes. See Fig. 13. The mean IoU (mIoU) represents the average IoU over all true positives. 

Figure 13: Intersection over Union. 

(2) Precision : The number of correct detections (true positives) divided by the total number of detections. It reflects the model’s ability to avoid false positives. Precision = True Positives True Positives + False Positives (3) Recall : The number of correct detections (true positives) divided by the total number of ground truth instances (i.e., the sum of true positives and false negatives). It reflects the model’s ability to avoid missing targets. Recall = True Positives True Positives + False Negatives (4) F1 Score : The harmonic mean of precision and recall. It offers a balance between these two metrics and penalizes imbalances (if one is very low, the F1 score will also be low). F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall Precision + Recall In practice, the F1 score can be plotted as a function of the confidence threshold to determine the score that best balances precision and recall. (5) Mean Average Precision mAP@0.5 : The average of the AP@0.5 across all classes, where AP@0.5 is the area under the precision-recall curve measured at IoU > 0.5. It provides an overall measure of model performance. (6) Mean Average Precision mAP@0.5:0.95 : Similar to mAP@0.5, but averaged over IoU thresholds ranging from 0.5 to 0.95 in increments of 0.05 (stricter). This gives better insight into how the model performs as the localization accuracy requirement increases. 

## 9.4 Agreement with the primary annotator 

We randomly selected 15 images and asked three independent anno-tators to re-label them using the same guidelines and the same tool described in Section 3.1. Their annotations were then compared to those of the primary annotator (the version used in the final dataset). To quantify agreement, we use the F1-score and the mIoU, with matches defined using an IoU threshold of 0.5. Table 4 reports these metrics for each of the 15 sampled images, for all three annotators, together with their means. 

Table 4: Agreement with the primary annotator for the three independent annotators.                                                                                                                                          

> Image ID F1 mIoU
> Ann1 Ann2 Ann3 Mean Ann1 Ann2 Ann3 Mean img_001 0.892 0.925 0.922 0.913 0.886 0.875 0.859 0.873 img_002 0.952 0.972 0.993 0.973 0.917 0.918 0.912 0.916 img_003 0.957 0.945 0.802 0.902 0.896 0.874 0.863 0.877 img_004 0.880 0.905 0.772 0.852 0.850 0.844 0.851 0.848 img_005 0.901 0.913 0.907 0.907 0.915 0.893 0.912 0.907 img_006 0.981 0.962 0.981 0.974 0.927 0.937 0.935 0.933 img_007 0.970 0.983 0.978 0.977 0.874 0.875 0.879 0.876 img_008 0.989 0.994 0.989 0.991 0.956 0.959 0.960 0.958 img_009 0.882 0.857 1.000 0.913 0.934 0.931 0.930 0.932 img_010 0.894 0.905 0.917 0.905 0.737 0.751 0.718 0.735 img_011 0.937 1.000 0.975 0.971 0.946 0.932 0.939 0.939 img_012 0.945 0.934 0.886 0.922 0.876 0.874 0.821 0.857 img_013 0.944 0.959 0.920 0.941 0.894 0.881 0.880 0.885 img_014 0.948 0.924 0.931 0.934 0.922 0.922 0.918 0.920 img_015 0.951 0.852 0.967 0.923 0.922 0.934 0.913 0.923
> Mean 0.935 0.935 0.929 0.933 0.897 0.893 0.886 0.892

## 9.5 Full visual comparison 

A visual comparison of widget detection outputs from other methods and our trained YOLO26 model for three example screenshots is presented Figure 14.   

> 14 TargetFinder : Detecting Widgets from Pixels on Desktop Interfaces Preprint, HAL, 2026

Ubuntu example macOs Example Windows 10 Example Ground truth Our YOLO26 OmniParser YOLO REMAUI UIED MobileSAM Martinez YOLO 

Figure 14: Visual comparison of widget detection outputs from other methods and our trained YOLO26 model for three example screenshots: a Firefox browser window in Ubuntu (left), a macOs desktop with white background (middle) and a Windows desktop with blue background and a screensaver that can lead to false detections (right). 

> 15

Preprint, HAL, 2026 Ahmed Ben Akouche, Géry Casiez, Mathieu Nancel, and Julien Gori 

## 9.6 Other performances 

Table 5: Performance of OmniParser (YOLO11m-1280) on progressively smaller UI elements (filtered by their YOLO-pixel size). 

Size subset Precision Recall F1 mAP@0.5 mAP@0.5:0.95 mIoU 

All sizes 0.753 0.651 0.698 0.693 0.391 0.787 Percentile 50 0.588 0.478 0.527 0.383 0.185 0.757 Percentile 30 0.392 0.390 0.391 0.206 0.087 0.742 Percentile 10 0.205 0.214 0.209 0.056 0.027 0.759 

Table 6: Performance of REMAUI on progressively smaller UI elements (filtered by their YOLO-pixel size). 

Size subset Precision Recall F1 mAP@0.5 mAP@0.5:0.95 mIoU 

All sizes 0.430 0.484 0.455 N/A N/A 0.749 Percentile 50 0.333 0.427 0.374 N/A N/A 0.742 Percentile 30 0.227 0.388 0.287 N/A N/A 0.751 Percentile 10 0.160 0.256 0.197 N/A N/A 0.801 

Table 7: Performance of TargetFinder (YOLO26n-640) on progressively smaller UI elements (filtered by their YOLO-pixel size). 

Size subset Precision Recall F1 mAP@0.5 mAP@0.5:0.95 mIoU 

All sizes 0.936 0.840 0.885 0.899 0.697 0.872 Percentile 50 0.901 0.700 0.788 0.674 0.470 0.839 Percentile 30 0.805 0.603 0.689 0.526 0.344 0.818 Percentile 10 0.691 0.303 0.421 0.252 0.133 0.764 

16