Title: Context-Aware Causal Gaze Forecasting for Human-Vehicle Interaction During In-Cabin Tracking Dropouts

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.12374v1

Published Time: Mon, 14 Sep 2026 00:27:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Context-Aware Causal Gaze Forecasting for Human–Vehicle Interaction During In-Cabin Tracking Dropouts 

Shabnam Shabani 

Department of Computer Science Western University 

London, ON, Canada sshaban7@uwo.ca 

Ghazal Farhani 

National Research Council Canada 

London, ON, Canada ghazal.farhani@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca 

Abstract —Dashboard-mounted gaze trackers often lose sight of the driver’s eyes during large head rotations, such as shoulder checks, mirror glances, and intersection scanning. These maneu-vers are also among the moments when information about the driver’s visual attention is most useful. Offline gap-filling methods may reconstruct a missing interval using observations from both sides of the gap, but an online driver-monitoring system cannot rely on measurements that have not yet occurred. We therefore formulate causal gaze recovery : forecasting unavailable gaze at time t without access to target-tracker gaze at t or any later time. We introduce the Causal Context-Gated Forecaster (CCGF), which encodes a 60-frame pre-dropout history of gaze and head pose and combines it with DINOv3 scene features. A learned reliability gate controls the contribution of the history and scene representations as the dropout progresses. We evaluate two scene-availability conditions: Live , in which the scene representation continues to update during tracker loss, and Frozen , in which the final pre-dropout representation is used throughout the missing interval. We evaluate CCGF on 2,047 eligible, naturally occurring GazeSense head_lost events drawn from 10 .5 h of natural-istic driving by ten drivers. Across the complete recordings, 

head_lost accounts for 8.5% of GazeSense recording time. Synchronized gaze coordinates from a head-mounted Neon tracker provide supervision and evaluation targets but are never used as model inputs. Under leave-one-driver-out evaluation, CCGF achieves a mean per-driver median error of 175 .7 px (10 .5◦) with Live scene updates, a 33% reduction relative to history-only causal forecasting. With Frozen scene input, the error increases to 210 .8 px ( 12 .9◦), indicating that scene obser-vations acquired during the dropout provide useful predictive information. We will release the dataset, evaluation protocol, and causal baselines. 

Index Terms —driver monitoring, causal gaze forecasting, gaze tracking, tracking dropout, driver attention, naturalistic driving. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Driver-monitoring systems are increasingly integrated into advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) to infer whether a driver is attentive, aware of surrounding traffic, and ready to act when needed [1]. Gaze is among the most informative behavioral cues because it directly indicates where visual 

Fig. 1. Recovering driver gaze through in-cabin tracking dropouts. (a) Drivers are recorded with a head-mounted Pupil Labs Neon eye tracker, which provides reference gaze during large head rotations, and a windshield-mounted GazeSense remote tracker representing the in-cabin sensing stream. 

(b) Shoulder checks, mirror glances, and other large head rotations can cause GazeSense to enter a head_lost state, while the head-mounted reference remains available throughout the dropout ∆t. (c) During tracker loss, CCGF forecasts gaze causally from pre-dropout GazeSense history and the currently available scene, without using future observations. In the illustrated example, the prediction is 57 px ( 3.7◦) from the Neon reference 0.5 s into the dropout. 

attention is allocated, and has been used for maneuver antic-ipation [2]–[4], weather and situation awareness [5]–[7], and takeover-readiness assessment [8]. These applications assume gaze is continuously observable. In real driving it is not. Dashboard-mounted trackers require a clear view of the driver’s eyes, yet ordinary driving involves large head rotations during mirror checks, shoulder checks, arXiv:2609.12374v1 [cs.CV] 11 Sep 2026 lane changes, and intersection scanning [9], [10]. During such movements the eyes leave the tracker’s field of view and the signal is lost, precisely when the driver’s visual attention is most safety-relevant. In our naturalistic recordings the dashboard tracker is unavailable for 8.5% of driving time, concentrated in moments such as blind-spot checks before a turn or merge. We ask whether gaze can be estimated during these events 

while the dropout is still occurring . This differs from con-ventional missing-data reconstruction: time-series imputation methods use observations on both sides of a gap [11]–[15], whereas an online driver-monitoring system cannot access ob-servations that have not yet occurred. The operational problem is strictly causal forecasting : at every instant during a dropout, gaze must be estimated from information available up to that instant only. Studying this problem requires ground truth during the very intervals in which the in-cabin tracker has failed. We therefore record drivers simultaneously with a dashboard-mounted GazeSense tracker [16] and head-mounted Pupil Labs Neon eye-tracking glasses [17]. GazeSense provides the deployable in-cabin signal together with its naturally occurring failures, while Neon continues to measure gaze through large head rotations. After synchronizing and cross-calibrating both systems into a common scene coordinate frame, Neon gaze 

measurements serve only as supervision and evaluation targets and are never supplied as predictive inputs. The outward-facing Neon scene camera, by contrast, provides the synchro-nized visual stream, standing in for the fixed vehicle camera a deployed system would use. From these recordings we construct and release a dataset of real, rotation-induced gaze dropouts from ten drivers, preserv-ing the timing, duration, and head-motion patterns of genuine tracker failures rather than synthetically masked gaps. As a reference solution we introduce CCGF (Causal Context-Aware Gaze Forecasting), which combines the valid pre-dropout gaze and head-motion history with contempora-neous visual context encoded by a frozen DINOv3 backbone [18], without access to post-dropout gaze. We compare CCGF against classical causal extrapolation, general-purpose learned forecasters, and non-causal imputers; the latter use future ob-servations and are reported only as offline references. Because a fixed vehicle camera would not follow the driver’s head, we evaluate two regimes: a live-scene regime that uses the egocentric view during the gap, giving an optimistic lower bound on error, and a frozen-scene regime with no new scene image during the gap, giving a worst-case upper bound. The main contributions of this work are: The main contri-butions of this work are:  

> •

We formulate recovery over genuine in-cabin gaze-tracker dropouts as a strictly causal forecasting problem, distinct from offline bidirectional imputation.  

> •

We introduce a synchronized naturalistic-driving dataset collected from ten drivers, containing genuine remote-tracker dropouts paired with head-mounted reference gaze. This enables evaluation on real rather than syn-thetically generated tracker failures. 1 

> •

We develop CCGF and evaluate it alongside classical causal extrapolation, learned causal forecasting, and non-causal imputation methods. This comparison isolates the contributions of pre-dropout gaze and head-pose history and live visual context during tracker loss. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Driver Gaze Estimation from Observable Eyes 

Most driver-gaze estimation methods assume that the driver’s face and eyes are visible at prediction time. DGAZE [19] maps gaze to the road scene from a cropped eye image, head pose, face location, and related geometric cues, reporting a localization error of 186.89 pixels on a 

1920 × 1080 road view. DashGaze [20] addresses continuous gaze estimation during naturalistic on-road driving from driver, face, eye, and facial-landmark inputs, and reports variation across camera positions and cases in which the face or one eye is only partially visible. Errors across such studies are not directly comparable because datasets, target representations, resolutions, and metrics differ, but they indicate that gaze localization in driving scenes remains a hard problem even with direct access to the eye region. Robustness to head pose is a longstanding difficulty in appearance-based gaze estimation. Gaze360 [21] and ETH-XGaze [22] extend benchmarks to wide pose and appearance variation, and 3DGazeNet [23] improves generalization by explicitly modeling three-dimensional eye geometry. Other work handles degraded visibility through richer appearance models, additional sensors, or multiple cameras. All of these improve estimation while some visual evidence of the eyes remains available; none address the case in which the tracker has entered a genuine head_lost interval and returns no valid gaze measurement at all. 

B. Missing Data and Causal Forecasting 

A tracker dropout can also be viewed as a missing-data problem. Deep time-series imputation methods recon-struct unobserved values from the surrounding sequence: BRITS [11] uses bidirectional recurrent dynamics, SAITS [12] self-attention, GP-VAE [24] a Gaussian-process latent prior, and CSDI [13] conditional score-based diffusion. These meth-ods exploit observations that occur after the missing interval, which an online driver-monitoring system cannot access while the failure is in progress. We therefore report BRITS, SAITS, and GP-VAE as non-causal offline references rather than deployable predictors. For the causal setting we compare against general-purpose forecasting architectures: DLinear [25], a decomposition-based linear model; TimesNet [26], which models temporal varia-tion through a two-dimensional multi-period representation; and SegRNN [27], which uses segment-wise recurrence with 

> 1An anonymized example recording is available for review. The complete dataset, code, and ethics approval details will be made publicly available upon acceptance.

parallel multi-step output. We also evaluate CSDI under a past-only forecasting protocol. All causal baselines receive only the pre-dropout GazeSense-derived history and never see future GazeSense observations or reference gaze. Our problem sits at the intersection of these two settings. Unlike gaze estimators, the predictor has no current eye-based observation during the interval of interest; unlike bidirectional imputation, it cannot use post-recovery measurements. We study strictly causal gaze forecasting during naturally occur-ring remote-tracker failure. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Dataset and Problem Setup 

We collected on-road recordings from ten drivers, com-prising 10 .5h of naturalistic driving. A windshield-mounted GazeSense remote tracker [16] provides the deployable gaze and head-pose stream, while a head-mounted Pupil Labs Neon system [17] provides independent reference gaze and an egocentric scene video. GazeSense head_lost intervals account for 8.5% of recorded driving time and form 2,047 naturally occurring tracker-failure events before benchmark filtering. The two streams are synchronized at 30 Hz and expressed in a common 1600 ×1200 Neon scene coordinate system. Per-recording geometric alignment uses a Kabsch-initialized rotation followed by an affine ray-space correction. Timestamp offset and linear drift are estimated independently for each recording. Neon gaze inside GazeSense failure intervals is excluded from calibration and is never used as a predictor input. 

Dropout events and eligibility. A real dropout is defined as a maximal contiguous GazeSense interval labeled head_lost .Each event is paired with the preceding L = 60 frames ( ≈ 2 s) of causal context, providing recent pre-failure gaze and head-motion history. We retain failures lasting 3–300 frames (0.1–10 s). The lower bound removes isolated missing samples, while the upper bound excludes rare prolonged interruptions outside the temporary tracker failures targeted here. At least 70% of failure frames must contain valid Neon reference gaze to ensure sufficient ground-truth coverage. We additionally require a valid GazeSense observation immediately before failure onset and at least 50% GazeSense availability within the preceding context. The latter criterion retains meaningful observed history without preferentially removing clustered failures, which commonly contain short periods of prior tracker loss. Temporal continuity is required throughout the context–failure interval. For scene-conditioned evaluation, at least 90% of failure frames must have a causal scene representation no older than 100 ms ( ≈ 3 frames at 30 Hz), ensuring predominantly contemporaneous visual information while tolerating occa-sional dropped frames. Frozen additionally requires a valid pre-dropout scene representation. These criteria yield 2,047 eligible naturally occurring dropout events. For duration-stratified analysis only, events are grouped into short ( < 0.5 s), medium ( 0.5–1.5 s), long ( 1.5–3 s), and very-long ( > 3 s) intervals. The boundaries were chosen from the empirical dropout-duration distribution to separate sub-second failures, the main body of intermediate-duration events, and the relatively rare long-duration tail; at 30 Hz they correspond to approximately 15, 45, and 90 frames, respectively. 

Input representation. GazeSense is represented by a 16-D deployable state comprising 3-D gaze direction, head-pose quaternion and translation, projected 2-D gaze, tracker availability, timing information, and head angular speed. Only observations available up to tracker-loss onset are used as gaze and head-pose inputs. Missing GazeSense measurements during head_lost intervals are neither interpolated nor sup-plied to the predictor; tracker availability and elapsed failure time remain explicitly represented. Each causally available scene frame is encoded by a frozen DINOv3 ViT-B/16 encoder [18], producing a 768-D visual representation. Scene features provide predictor-side visual context, whereas Neon gaze is used exclusively as reference supervision and for evaluation. 

B. Causal Forecasting Formulation 

Let t0 denote the final valid GazeSense frame before tracker loss, and let t0 + 1 , . . . , t 1 denote the failure interval. Let xt

denote the deployable GazeSense state, st the causal scene representation, and gt the Neon reference gaze. Under the Live 

setting, CCGF estimates 

p(gt | xt0−L+1: t0 , st0−L+1: t) , t0 < t ≤ t1. (1) This formulation enforces the online constraint directly: GazeSense observations terminate at t0, while scene informa-tion is available only up to the current prediction time t. No future GazeSense measurements, future scene observations, or Neon gaze targets are available to the predictor, and the eventual duration of the failure is unknown at inference time. We evaluate two primary scene conditions. In Live , the scene pathway continues to receive causally updated visual representations throughout tracker loss. In Frozen , the final valid pre-dropout scene state is held fixed after t0, so no new visual information is incorporated during the failure. A separate scene-free variant disables the visual pathway entirely and is used only as an ablation to quantify the contribution of scene information. 

C. CCGF Architecture 

CCGF contains separate causal pathways for pre-dropout driver history and visual context. The 60-frame GazeSense context is projected to 128 dimensions and encoded by a two-layer unidirectional LSTM. Once tracking is lost, missing GazeSense measurements are not recursively supplied to this pathway. Instead, the final pre-dropout history state is condi-tioned on elapsed failure time using a sinusoidal positional encoding, Algorithm 1: CCGF forecasting during tracker loss                                    

> Input :pre-dropout GazeSense context; causal scene stream
> Output: gaze forecast ˆgt
> 1Encode GazeSense history into hHt0;
> 2Encode pre-dropout scene context into hSt0;
> 3for t=t0+ 1 , . . . while GazeSense is unavailable do
> 4condition hHt0on elapsed failure time;
> 5update scene state using the current causal scene representation (Live) or the final pre-dropout representation (Frozen);
> 6compute fusion weight αt;
> 7fuse history and scene states using Eq. 4;
> 8predict spatial distribution pt;
> 9ˆgt←P
> kpt,k ck;
> 10 emit ˆgt;
> 11 end

ehHt = hHt0 + W∆PE( τt), (2) where τt denotes the elapsed time since tracker loss. The 768-D DINOv3 representation is projected to 64 di-mensions and processed by a one-layer unidirectional scene LSTM. Under Live input, the scene state continues to update as new causal scene observations arrive. Under Frozen input, the final pre-dropout representation is repeated. Invalid scene observations do not advance the scene pathway. The history and scene pathways are combined through a learned scalar gate, 

αt = σ



fg [ehHt ∥hSt ]



, (3) 

hFt = αt ehHt + (1 − αt)WS hSt , (4) where αt = 1 corresponds to history-only prediction and 

αt = 0 to scene-only prediction. If no valid visual context is available, the model falls back to the history pathway. The fused representation is decoded to a 24 ×32 spatial probability distribution pt. The predicted gaze is its center of mass, 

ˆgt = X

> k

pt,k ck, (5) where ck denotes the normalized center of grid cell k. The spatial spread of the distribution provides a corresponding uncertainty estimate and is also used by the probabilistic training objective. 

D. Training and Evaluation 

Training. Training combines naturally occurring head_lost 

events with synthetic failures sampled from continuously tracked intervals. A real event is sampled with probability 0.3; otherwise, a synthetic failure is generated with duration sampled from the empirical distribution of real events in the corresponding training partition. The GazeSense payload is masked over the synthetic failure while the causal scene stream is preserved. Synthetic failures are used only for training; validation and test sets contain exclusively naturally occurring tracker failures. CCGF is optimized using 

L = LNLL + 0 .5 Lhm + 0 .1 Lctx , (6) where LNLL supervises the probabilistic gaze prediction, Lhm 

supervises the spatial heatmap, and Lctx provides auxiliary supervision on valid pre-dropout context frames. The weights 0.5 and 0.1 are selected through nested driver-disjoint hyper-parameter tuning using only the development drivers; the outer test driver is never involved in their selection. AdamW is used with learning rate 10 −3, weight decay 

10 −4, batch size 16, dropout 0.1, and gradient clipping at 1.0. Training runs for at most 30 epochs, with checkpoint and stop-ping decisions made only from inner-validation performance. 

Nested driver-disjoint protocol. Generalization is evaluated using nested leave-one-driver-out (LODO) cross-validation. In each outer fold, one driver is held out entirely for testing and all remaining drivers form the development set. Hyperpa-rameter and training-duration selection are performed within this development set using an inner driver-disjoint LODO procedure: each development driver serves once as the inner validation driver, with the remaining drivers used for training. Candidate configurations are ranked by the mean driver-level median pixel error across the inner validation folds. After inner model selection, the selected configuration is retrained from scratch on the complete development set and evaluated on the held-out outer driver. Multiple recordings from the same participant always remain in the same parti-tion. Final learned-model evaluation is repeated across three independent training seeds. 

Baselines. We compare CCGF with both simple motion refer-ences and learned time-series methods. Zero-order hold (ZOH) repeats the final valid projected GazeSense gaze throughout tracker loss. Constant velocity (CV) fits a linear trajectory to the five most recent valid gaze observations and falls back to ZOH when fewer than two observations are available. DLinear, TimesNet, SegRNN, and CSDI are evaluated as strict causal temporal forecasters. Each receives the same 60-frame pre-dropout GazeSense-derived history, with no scene features, Neon gaze, or future GazeSense observations. Input normalization is estimated from the training fold only. Because these models require a fixed prediction length, they forecast 30 frames (1 s) at a time. If tracker loss continues, the model is rolled forward using its own predicted 2-D gaze as pseudo-history while unavailable GazeSense channels remain missing. The true terminal dropout duration is never supplied to the model and is used only by the offline evaluator to terminate prediction at tracker recovery. BRITS, SAITS, and GP-VAE are included separately as non-causal imputation references. Their input consists of projected GazeSense gaze with the failure interval marked missing and additionally includes 60 post-recovery frames. These methods can therefore exploit future observations to reconstruct the missing interval and represent an easier offline setting. Fig. 2. CCGF causal forecasting pipeline. The history pathway encodes the valid 60-frame pre-dropout GazeSense context and is subsequently conditioned on elapsed failure time without receiving missing GazeSense measurements. In parallel, the scene pathway processes causally available DINOv3 visual representations. A learned scalar gate combines the two pathways, and a spatial prediction head forecasts gaze during tracker loss. Neon gaze is used only for supervision and evaluation. 

Metrics and aggregation. Evaluation is restricted to naturally occurring failure frames with valid Neon reference gaze. The primary metric is Euclidean pixel error in the 1600 ×1200 

scene coordinate system, with angular error reported as a com-plementary measure. Because error distributions are heavy-tailed and recordings contain different numbers of failure frames, errors are first summarized using the median within each held-out driver. The primary reported result is the mean of these ten driver-level medians. IV. R ESULTS 

we evaluate all results on naturally occurring GazeSense 

head_lost events under the driver-disjoint LODO protocol described in Sec. III-D. For each held-out driver, we compute the median framewise prediction error over eligible dropout frames and report the mean across the ten test drivers. Learned-model results are aggregated across three independent training seeds. Angular error is reported as well. 

A. Overall Causal Forecasting Performance 

Table I compares CCGF with causal alternatives during real tracker loss: simple motion extrapolation, learned time-series forecasters, and, as non-causal offline references, bidirectional imputers. The motion baselines perform poorly over real dropout intervals. Zero-order hold, which repeats the last valid gaze estimate throughout the gap, yields 334 .2 px, and constant-velocity extrapolation yields 359 .1 px. CCGF under the Live scene condition achieves 175 .7 px ( 10 .52 ◦), a reduction of 

47 .4% and 51 .1% , respectively. The learned causal forecasters improve on motion extrapola-tion but remain well above CCGF: DLinear reaches 255 .8 px, TimesNet 235 .4 px, SegRNN 279 .5 px, and CSDI 249 .3 px, corresponding to reductions of 31 .3% , 25 .4% , 37 .1% , and 

29 .5% for CCGF-Live. Under the more conservative Frozen condition, CCGF reaches 210 .8 px ( 12 .91 ◦), still below every causal baseline in Table I. All causal methods are subject to the same no-future-information constraint, and none receives Neon gaze or future GazeSense observations as input. The temporal baselines see the 60-frame pre-dropout GazeSense history but no scene fea-tures, whereas CCGF additionally uses the causally available scene pathway. Table I therefore compares complete forecast-ing systems under strict causality; the specific contribution of scene context is isolated in Sec. IV-B1. BRITS, SAITS, and GP-VAE are included as non-causal references. They may use observations after the missing inter-val and therefore solve an easier offline imputation problem than the online forecasting problem considered here; because they do not use the scene pathway, we treat them as reference points rather than modality-matched competitors. Their errors nevertheless remain above CCGF under both scene conditions. This is a property of the failure mode rather than of the imputers: a rotation-induced dropout begins and ends with the head near the forward position, so post-recovery frames resemble pre-dropout frames, and interpolating between them TABLE I COMPARISON WITH CAUSAL FORECASTING BASELINES AND NON -CAUSAL IMPUTATION REFERENCES ON REAL TRACKER DROPOUTS .LEARNED -MODEL RESULTS ARE AGGREGATED ACROSS TEN LODO TEST FOLDS AND THREE INDEPENDENT TRAINING SEEDS .

Method Error (px) Angular ( ◦)

Causal forecasting 

Zero-order hold 334.2 22.20 Constant velocity 359.1 23.00 DLinear 255.8 15.64 TimesNet 235.4 14.80 SegRNN 279.5 16.96 CSDI 249.3 15.31 

CCGF (ours), Live 175.7 10.52 CCGF (ours), Frozen 210.8 12.91 

Non-causal imputation references 

BRITS 243.6 15.05 SAITS 233.4 14.38 GP-VAE 257.1 15.87 

carries little information about gaze during the excursion itself. Future observations are thus not only unavailable online but largely uninformative for this class of dropout. 

B. Ablation: History, Scene Context, and Gated Fusion 

We next isolate the contributions of pre-dropout gaze–head history, visual context, spatial prediction, and reliability-aware fusion. Table II summarizes the resulting ablation. 

1) Scene Context and Reliability-Aware Fusion : With no scene pathway, the causal gaze–head LSTM reaches 263 .9 px. Providing continuously updated scene observations reduces the error substantially: simple scene concatenation reaches 

176 .3 px, while Live CCGF reaches 175 .7 px. The small 0.6 px difference between these variants shows that much of the Live-condition gain comes from access to current visual context itself, rather than from the gating mechanism alone. The role of reliability-aware fusion becomes clearer when scene information becomes stale. Repeating the final pre-dropout scene embedding throughout tracker loss increases simple concatenation from 176 .3 to 244 .3 px and the ungated spatial-heatmap variant from 182 .2 to 245 .9 px. In contrast, CCGF reaches 210 .8 px in the same Frozen condition, im-proving over simple concatenation by 33 .5 px. For CCGF, removing within-dropout scene updates in-creases error from 175 .7 px ( 10 .52 ◦) to 210 .8 px ( 12 .91 ◦), a loss of 35 .1 px and 2.39 ◦. Frozen CCGF nevertheless remains 

10 .5% below TimesNet ( 235 .4 px, 14 .8◦), the strongest causal baseline in Table I, indicating that the final pre-dropout scene embedding retains predictive value after tracker loss. When scene information is removed entirely, CCGF reaches 

258 .4 px ( 15 .93 ◦), close to the 263 .9 px history-only LSTM. Together, these results indicate that visual context provides the main improvement over temporal history alone, while reliability-aware fusion becomes particularly useful when that context becomes stale. To illustrate how Live vs Frozen scene can affect prediction errors on exactly the same frames, Fig. 3 shows a matched   

> Fig. 3. Illustrative matched Live–Frozen comparison for the held-out driver 7. Pixel-error distributions are shown for the same 8,747 LODO test frames. Live uses causally updated egocentric scene observations, whereas Frozen repeats the final pre-dropout scene embedding throughout tracker loss. In this representative example, median error increases from 153.4 px to 189.6 px and P90 from 385.5 px to 432.5 px. The figure illustrates the effect on matched frames; aggregate Live–Frozen comparisons are based on the complete ten-driver evaluation in Table II.

Live–Frozen example for the held-out driver. For this example, the same 8,747 LODO test frames are evaluated under both conditions. Median error increases from 153 .4 px with Live scene updates to 189 .6 px when the final pre-dropout scene embedding is repeated throughout the failure interval. The upper tail also shifts, with P90 increasing from 385 .5 to 

432 .5 px. This single-driver example is consistent with the aggregate trend in Table II, but quantitative conclusions are based on the ten-driver LODO results rather than on this selected example, and complements the ten-driver aggregate rather than replacing it. 

2) Performance Across Dropout Duration : Using the predefined dropout-duration bins, performance under the Live scene condition remains relatively stable over the durations represented in the dataset. The mean per-driver median error is 165 .6 px for short dropouts, 176 .7 px for medium dropouts, and 180 .5 px for long dropouts. The very-long category reaches 176 .2 px. Under the Frozen condition, the corresponding errors are 

189 .4 px, 215 .1 px, 211 .2 px, and 199 .8 px for short, medium, long, and very-long dropouts, respectively. Frozen therefore produces higher error in every duration group, with the largest Live–Frozen differences observed for medium and long fail-ures. For Live, error increases by only 14 .9 px (approximately 

9% ) from short to long dropouts, consistent with the model continuing to receive causally current scene observations as the last valid GazeSense measurement becomes older. In contrast, Frozen receives no new visual evidence after failure onset and therefore relies entirely on the pre-dropout scene state. Only 61 events fall into the very-long category, so estimates for this group are interpreted cautiously. 

C. Qualitative Analysis 

Figure 4 shows selected examples from naturally occurring GazeSense tracker dropouts. The same frames are compared TABLE II ABLATION OF SCENE CONDITIONING AND RELIABILITY -GATED FUSION . I NFERENCE TIME IS MEASURED AT BATCH SIZE ONE AND INCLUDES DINO V3                                            

> SCENE FEATURE EXTRACTION WHERE APPLICABLE .Variant Live (px / ◦)Frozen (px / ◦)None (px / ◦)Params Inference (ms) ↓
> Causal LSTM (gaze +head pose) ——263.9 / 16.30 269k 0.78
> +scene, concatenation 176.3 / 10.62 244.3 / 15.05 249.6 / 15.36 335k 10.35
> +scene, spatial-heatmap head 182.2 / 10.95 245.9 / 15.11 252.5 / 15.59 492k 11.10
> CCGF: reliability-gated heatmap fusion 175.7 / 10.52 210.8 / 12.91 258.4 / 15.93 505k 11.38
> Fig. 4. Selected qualitative examples during real GazeSense tracking failures. Columns compare CCGF with causally updated egocentric scene context (Live), CCGF with the final pre-dropout scene representation held fixed during tracker loss (Frozen), DLinear, and TimesNet on matched frames. Green circles denote Neon reference gaze, red circles denote model predictions, and the colored CCGF heatmaps visualize the predicted spatial gaze distribution. The examples span forward-facing and large-head-rotation conditions. Quantitative comparisons are reported over the complete driver-disjoint benchmark rather than from these selected examples.

across CCGF-Live, CCGF-Frozen, DLinear, and TimesNet, allowing the effect of scene availability and temporal-only forecasting to be visualized under matched conditions. These examples are intended to illustrate the spatial be-havior of the predictions rather than to provide additional quantitative evidence. All comparative conclusions are based on the complete driver-disjoint evaluation reported in Tables I and II; the matched Live–Frozen error distributions are shown separately in Fig. 3. 

D. Runtime and Online Feasibility 

In the benchmark configuration, CCGF requires approx-imately 11 .38 ms for batch-1 inference, including DINOv3 scene feature extraction and the forecasting model. This re-mains below the 33 .3 ms frame period of a 30 Hz input stream. The DINOv3 backbone is frozen and therefore requires only a forward pass at deployment. Neon gaze is not required online and is used only as the independent supervision and evaluation reference. The reported latency reflects the research implemen-tation rather than a fully optimized streaming system. 

E. Limitations and Future Work 

Several limitations define the scope of the present findings. First, the Live scene stream comes from the head-mounted Neon camera, whose viewpoint rotates with the driver’s head and may therefore encode head-motion cues in addition to scene semantics. The Live result should thus be read as an optimistic case. In the Frozen condition, by contrast, the scene input stops updating once tracking is lost and is held at the last frame observed while the head was forward-facing, so the model receives no visual information about the regions to the left or right of the vehicle that the driver turns toward. The Frozen result is therefore a conservative case. Together, the two conditions bracket the error that can be expected from a deployed system; the exact mapping from this platform to fixed vehicle-mounted cameras is left for future work. Second, the current framework uses only GazeSense-derived driver state and visual scene context. Vehicle signals such as steering angle, vehicle yaw and pitch, acceleration, and turn-signal state could provide additional causal information, partic-ularly during lane changes, turns, and intersection approaches. Integrating such telemetry with fixed-camera visual context is a natural next step. Third, the dataset contains ten drivers. Driver-disjoint LODO evaluation and three independent training seeds provide a strict test of generalization and reduce sensitivity to afavorable optimization run, but larger and more diverse cohorts are needed to assess robustness across drivers, vehicles, road environments, and sensor configurations. V. C ONCLUSION 

This work formulates naturally occurring failures of remote in-cabin gaze tracking as a strictly causal forecasting problem rather than as an offline gap-filling problem. Such failures fre-quently occur during challenging viewing conditions, includ-ing large driver head rotations, when the remote tracker can no longer maintain a reliable gaze estimate. CCGF combines valid pre-dropout GazeSense gaze and head-pose history with causally available scene observations while excluding future GazeSense measurements and head-mounted Neon gaze from predictor inputs. Neon gaze is used only as an independent training and evaluation reference. Across driver-disjoint LODO evaluation, CCGF achieves a mean per-driver median error of 175 .7 px ( 10 .52 ◦) when causally updated egocentric scene observations remain avail-able and 210 .8 px ( 12 .91 ◦) when the final pre-dropout scene state is held fixed throughout tracker loss. Under the Live condition, CCGF reduces pixel error by 

47 .4% relative to zero-order hold, 51 .1% relative to constant velocity, 31 .3% relative to DLinear, 25 .4% relative to Times-Net, 37 .1% relative to SegRNN, and 29 .5% relative to CSDI. Even under the Frozen condition, CCGF reduces pixel error by 36 .9% relative to zero-order hold and by 10 .5% relative to TimesNet, the strongest learned causal baseline. The ablation results further show that access to visual context accounts for much of the improvement over history-only forecasting, while reliability-aware fusion becomes par-ticularly useful when scene information is no longer updated. At the same time, the head-mounted nature of the Live scene stream means that its performance should be interpreted as an optimistic egocentric condition rather than as a direct estimate of fixed-camera deployment accuracy. The central finding is therefore deliberately narrower than exact gaze reconstruction: a temporary loss of remote gaze tracking does not necessarily imply a complete loss of infor-mation about the driver’s attended region. Even under strict causal constraints, useful gaze information can be forecast through naturally occurring tracker failures, including chal-lenging periods involving substantial head motion. Extending this framework to fixed vehicle-mounted cameras, vehicle telemetry, and larger driver cohorts is the next step toward translating this result into a practical driver-monitoring system. REFERENCES [1] SAE On-Road Automated Vehicle Committee, “Taxonomy and defini-tions for terms related to driving automation systems for on-road motor vehicles,” Standard J3016, SAE International, April 2021. [2] A. Jain, A. Singh, H. S. Koppula, S. Soh, and A. Saxena, “Recurrent neural networks for driver activity anticipation via sensory-fusion archi-tecture,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 3118–3125, 2016. [3] Y.-C. Kung, A. Zhang, J. Wang, and J. Biswas, “Looking inside out: Anticipating driver intent from videos,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 5608–5614, 2024. [4] M. Wu, T. Louw, M. Lahijanian, W. Ruan, X. Huang, N. Merat, and M. Kwiatkowska, “Gaze-based intention anticipation over driving manoeuvres in semi-autonomous vehicles,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 6210–6216, 2019. [5] S. Shabani, S. Beauchemin, and M. Bauer, “Analysis of driver gaze and attention to traffic signs,” Journal of advanced transportation , vol. 2022, no. 1, p. 9970775, 2022. [6] A. Biswas, B. A. Pardhi, C. Chuck, J. Holtz, S. Niekum, H. Admoni, and A. Allievi, “Modeling drivers’ situational awareness from eye gaze for driving assistance,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2024. [7] G. Farhani, T. Rahman, and D. Charlebois, “Weather-dependent vari-ations in driver gaze behavior: A case study in rainy conditions,” in 

2025 IEEE International Conference on Vehicular Electronics and Safety (ICVES) , pp. 88–95, IEEE, 2025. [8] Y. Huang, Y. Lin, L. Yue, Z. Yao, and J. Wang, “From gaze to movement: Predicting visual attention for autonomous driving human-machine interaction based on programmatic imitation learning,” in IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 26146–26155, 2025. [9] Y. Wang, G. Yuan, and X. Fu, “Driver’s head pose and gaze zone estimation based on multi-zone templates registration and multi-frame point cloud fusion,” Sensors , vol. 22, no. 9, p. 3154, 2022. [10] Y. Wang, G. Yuan, Z. Mi, J. Peng, X. Ding, Z. Liang, and X. Fu, “Continuous driver’s gaze zone estimation using RGB-D camera,” 

Sensors , vol. 19, no. 6, p. 1287, 2019. [11] W. Cao, D. Wang, J. Li, H. Zhou, L. Li, and Y. Li, “BRITS: Bidirectional recurrent imputation for time series,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 31, 2018. [12] W. Du, D. Cˆ ot´ e, and Y. Liu, “SAITS: Self-attention-based imputation for time series,” Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 219, p. 119619, 2023. [13] Y. Tashiro, J. Song, Y. Song, and S. Ermon, “CSDI: Conditional score-based diffusion models for probabilistic time series imputation,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 34, pp. 24804–24816, 2021. [14] T. Nie, G. Qin, W. Ma, Y. Mei, and J. Sun, “ImputeFormer: Low rankness-induced transformers for generalizable spatiotemporal imputa-tion,” in ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) , pp. 2260–2271, 2024. [15] J. M. L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff, “Diffusion-based time series impu-tation and forecasting with structured state space models,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) , 2022. [16] Eyeware, “GazeSense eye tracking sdk.” https://eyeware.tech/gazesense/, 2026. Accessed: Sep. 11, 2026. [17] Pupil Labs, “Neon: Eye tracking for research and beyond.” https: //pupil-labs.com/products/neon, 2026. Accessed: Sep. 11, 2026. [18] O. Sim´ eoni, H. V. Vo, M. Seitzer, F. Baldassarre, M. Oquab, et al. ,“DINOv3,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 , 2025. [19] I. Dua, T. A. John, R. Gupta, and C. V. Jawahar, “DGAZE: Driver gaze mapping on road,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 5946–5953, 2020. [20] T. A. John, V. N. Balasubramanian, and C. V. Jawahar, “DashGaze: Driver gaze through dashcam,” in IROS , 2025. [21] P. Kellnhofer, A. Recasens, S. Stent, W. Matusik, and A. Torralba, “Gaze360: Physically unconstrained gaze estimation in the wild,” in 

IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2019. [22] X. Zhang, S. Park, T. Beeler, D. Bradley, S. Tang, and O. Hilliges, “ETH-XGaze: A large scale dataset for gaze estimation under extreme head pose and gaze variation,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020. [23] E. Ververas, P. Gkagkos, J. Deng, M. C. Doukas, J. Guo, and S. Zafeiriou, “3DGazeNet: Generalizing 3D gaze estimation with weak-supervision from synthetic views,” arXiv:2212.02997 , 2023. [24] V. Fortuin, D. Baranchuk, G. R¨ atsch, and S. Mandt, “Gp-vae: Deep probabilistic time series imputation,” in Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ,vol. 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 1651–1661, PMLR, 2020. [25] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective for time series forecasting?,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 37, pp. 11121–11128, 2023. [26] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Timesnet: Temporal 2d-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [27] S. Lin, W. Lin, W. Wu, F. Zhao, R. Mo, and H. Zhang, “Segrnn: Segment recurrent neural network for long-term time series forecasting,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 9861–9871, 2026.