Title: JARVIS: A Just-in-Time AR Visual Instruction System for Cross-Reality Task Guidance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10108v2

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:12:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# JARVIS: A Just-in-Time AR Visual Instruction System for Cross-Reality Task Guidance 

# Yusi Sun ∗

the University of Hong Kong Hong Kong, China soniasun@connect.hku.hk 

# Ying Jiang ∗

University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, United States anajymua@gmail.com 

# Jiayin Lu ∗

University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, United States jiayin.kay.lu@gmail.com 

# Yin Yang 

the University of Utah Salt Lake, United States yin.yang@utah.edu 

# Yong-Hong Kuo †

the University of Hong Kong Hong Kong, China yhkuo@hku.hk 

# Chenfanfu Jiang †

University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, United States cffjiang@math.ucla.edu Step Type  State Cues  Target Configuration Preview  Interactions 

> Reality -to -Reality
> (R2R)
> Reality -to -Virtual
> (R2V)
> Virtual -to -Reality
> (V2R)
> Virtual -to -Virtual
> (V2V)

Just -in -Time Feedback 

Object Preview 

Action 

Completed 

Next Step                                                

> e.g.Check Coffee
> Machine, lift the
> handle up, place the
> mug on the drip
> tray …
> e.g.Move mouse
> over icon to check
> status, press button
> to take photo, press
> keyboard to walk …
> e.g.Pour milk into the
> glass until it's about
> 2/3full, fold the paper
> as aboat shape …
> e.g.Find aRock to mine,
> doing coding following
> some objectives, painting
> something in ipad …

State Preview 

Motion: Trajectory 

Static Object: Bounding box 

Action: Tool, Gesture 

Task Type 

> Reality Task
> (Assembly/Manipulation)
> Virtual Task
> (Game/Creation)
> Require more statement
> confirmation
> Require more physical
> operation

Video Clip 

> (Optional)

Figure 1: JARVIS instructs a user to make a latte with a coffee machine. Tasks are categorized by step type, Reality-to-Reality (R2R), Reality-to-Virtual (R2V), Virtual-to-Reality (V2R), and Virtual-to-Virtual (V2V), requiring different cross-reality guidance strategies. The system delivers six situated visual guidance types: (1) State Cues , showing current goal, active step status, and next step status; (2) 

Target Configuration Preview , overlaying the expected post-step object state, (3) Static Object Localization via bounding boxes or masks, (4) Action Embodiment rendering segmented tool or hand representations, (5) Motion Cues animating trajectory, rotation axis, and direction, and (6) Just-in-Time Audio Feedback confirming step completion and advancing to the next step. 

## Abstract 

Many everyday tasks rely on external tutorials such as manuals and videos, requiring users to constantly switch between reading instructions and performing actions, which disrupts workflow and increases cognitive load. Augmented reality (AR) enables in-situ guidance, while recent advances in large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs) make it possible to automatically generate such guidance. However, existing AI-powered AR tutorial systems primarily focus on physical procedural tasks and provide limited support for hybrid physical and virtual workspaces. To address this gap, we conduct a formative study of cross-reality tasks 

> ∗

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

> †

Corresponding author. 

and identify key requirements for state awareness and cross-reality coordination. We present JARVIS , a VLM-driven AR instruction system that generates contextual, step-by-step guidance from a single prompt, with real-time state verification and adaptive visual feedback. To inform the system design, we conducted a formative study to understand guidance needs across cross-reality tasks, which we categorize into four types: real-to-real (R2R), real-to-virtual (R2V), virtual-to-real (V2R), and virtual-to-virtual (V2V). A within-subjects study (N=14) across four domains shows JARVIS improves usability, workload, success rate, and visualization effectiveness over baselines. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Mixed / augmented reality .

> arXiv:2604.10108v2 [cs.HC] 14 Apr 2026 Sun et al.

## Keywords 

Augmented Reality, Task Guidance, VLMs, Mixed Reality 

## 1 Introduction 

Learning real-world tasks, from assembling IKEA furniture to paint-ing, crafting, or configuring digital creative tools, often depends on external instructional materials such as manuals, tutorial videos, and step-by-step demonstrations. However, most instructional materials are labor-intensive to produce, static, and poorly aligned with users’ moment-to-moment needs. They also require frequent switching between instructions and task execution, disrupting workflow and increasing cognitive load. To provide intuitive and seamless instruc-tions, prior work [ 4, 7, 8] has explored AR devices for in-situ guidance by embedding instructions directly into the user’s workspace, thereby reducing cognitive overhead and supporting situated action. Nev-ertheless, those AR guidance systems primarily derive contextual guidance from procedural content using either heuristic rules or human demonstrations, requiring task-specific customization. With advances in artificial intelligence (AI), recent work [ 28 , 38 ] integrates large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs) into AR guidance systems to provide more generalizable tutorials by leveraging their knowledge priors. AI-powered AR guidance systems fall into two paradigms. For one, it provides procedural text-based or symbolic guidance using MLLMs [ 10 ], LLMs [ 28 ], and VLMs [ 29 ] without requiring pre-registration, while such guidance remains largely text-based and insufficient for complex tasks that require richer multimodal grounding [ 1]. For another, recent work [ 15 , 38 ] explores multimodal guidance beyond text by using visual cues and state feedback to support spatial understanding and status checks, including visual augmentations such as tool overlays and object highlighting from task manuals [ 38 ], as well as progress-aware state feedback and audio guidance from instructional videos [ 15 ]. These approaches focus on physical procedural tasks (e.g., assembly and maintenance), relying on visual cues effective in physical settings, while offering limited support for virtual tasks, where targets are more digital, symbolic, or evolving. Such tasks require more adaptive guidance to convey transformations, intermediate states, and abstract constraints beyond conventional AR tutorials for physical manipulation [ 6 , 25 ]. This motivates us to explore the design of multimodal guidance for diverse tasks across physical and virtual spaces, and to rethink what to visualize, where to present guidance, and how to coordinate workspaces. To better design multimodal guidance for both virtual and physical tasks, we conducted a formative study comparing three guidance, text, images, and video, across physical (computer setup, origami) and virtual (gameplay, digital painting) tasks. The results show that many tasks are inherently hybrid, spanning both real and virtual domains. Based on this observation, we categorize instructional steps into four types according to the relationship between the guidance source and the locus of action: Real-to-Real (R2R), Real-to-Virtual (R2V), Virtual-to-Real (V2R), and Virtual-to-Virtual (V2V). Moreover, users prefer image guidance for highlighting key steps and video guidance for providing full support in unfamiliar tasks and expect explicit state feedback for progress tracking. These findings inform a design space covering cross-reality steps, state cues, target previews, feedback, action embodiment, motion cues, and object localization. Based on these findings, we propose JARVIS , an AR visual instruction system that integrates a task planning module and a visual rendering module to generate contextual step-by-step guidance in situ with explicit state feedback from a single prompt. Specifically, given a prompt, a pre-task planner retrieves relevant online materials and produces a structured plan that defines the step sequence, per-step visualization strategies, and localization targets based on the input, current state, and retrieved content. Then an in-task planner performs state verification, sub-planning, and situated rendering. It analyzes the current scene, the active step, and the structured plan to provide context-aware textual and in-situ visual guidance, enabling flexible support when users make errors or misunderstand instructions. Finally, a visual renderer generates multimodal guidance, including images, video clips, motion trajectories, and arrows, along with explicit state feedback. To evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed system, we conduct a within-subjects study with 14 participants across R2R, R2V, V2R, and V2V tasks. The results demonstrate that JARVIS provides intuitive and effective guidance, enabling users to complete tasks efficiently across hybrid physical and virtual environments. In summary, our contributions are: 

• A formative study investigates how AR guidance supports hybrid physical and virtual tasks, and derives a design space for multimodal guidance across cross-reality scenarios. 

• JARVIS , an AR visual instruction system that generates contextual, step-by-step guidance with explicit state feedback to support diverse tutorial tasks from a single prompt. 

• A user study demonstrating the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed system, as well as its generalizability across a variety of hybrid physical and virtual tasks. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Context-Aware Task Guidance 

Research on task guidance has shifted from static, pre-authored in-structions to adaptive assistance based on physical situations, action progress, and user intentions [ 14 , 20 , 21 ]. Early mixed-reality systems emphasized in-situ and collaborative support for physical tasks. [ 31 ]. Document-to-AR pipelines [ 22 ] showed instruction can be spatially aligned rather than detached, treating context as a core component of interaction rather than a secondary layer. Prior work [ 4, 8, 17 , 34 ]made context operational by explicitly modeling task state, object configuration, and user progress. Video-Annotated AR Assembly Tutorials [ 34 ], ProcessAR [ 8], TutorialLens [ 17 ], and MobileTu-tAR [ 4] connected demonstrations, procedural decomposition, and scene-linked annotations for in-situ step-by-step assistance. However, these systems rely on demonstrations or manual correspondences. Rather than end-to-end text-to-AR transformation, PaperToPlace [ 7]and InstructAR [ 16 ] shift attention to contextual grounding: once instruction steps are extracted, the key challenge lies in determining which step is relevant to the current situation, where it should be placed in the scene, and when it should be presented relative to the user’s progress. Beyond adaptation to task state, object configuration, and user progress, some research work [ 15 , 20 ] further explore user-and context-aware adaptation into guidance systems. Vid2Coach [ 15 ] expands guidance to account for user ability, available tools, and alternative execution strategies, while Satori [ 20 ] moves toward JARVIS : A Just-in-Time AR Visual Instruction System for Cross-Reality Task Guidance 

proactive assistance by modeling user belief and environmental con-text. Despite these advances, existing systems assume instruction and action occur within a single reality layer, limiting cross-reality tasks. Our goal is therefore to support adaptive context-aware guidance across both physical and virtual environments. 

## 2.2 AR Tutorial Systems and Guidance Representations 

AR instruction research shows that effective guidance depends not only on spatial registration, but also on guidance representations [ 17 , 18 ]. Early systems such as interactive manuals [ 24 ] and au-thorable AR instructions [ 2 ] used anchored overlays to deliver procedural content, showing that in-situ presentation reduces at-tention switching and makes instructions more actionable. However, they rely on manually authored AR elements, limiting support for fine-grained action dynamics. To provide richer procedural infor-mation, [ 17 , 18 , 34 ] explored multimodal representations to guide user actions. Audio stickies [ 18 ], Video-Annotated AR Assembly Tutorials [ 34 ], TutorialLens [ 17 ], and MobileTutAR [ 4] explored how demonstrations, captured media, and layered annotations could be organized into usable tutorial flows. This progression suggests that AR tutorials are not simple text-plus-overlay interfaces, but struc-tured combinations of visual elements conveying targets, actions, and temporal order. However, directly presenting demonstrations through images and video might be challenging, due to viewpoint constraints [ 23 ], frequent context switching [ 7], and limited support for adaptive feedback [ 14 , 17 ]. To more effectively leverage multi-modal representations, ARticulate [ 32 ] explores how motion cues, embodied demonstrations, and calibration-oriented overlays support different forms of procedural understanding, while Guided Reality [38] derives a visual guidance taxonomy from user manuals, identi-fying recurrent forms such as component highlighting, movement indication, hand gesture demonstration, tool-with-motion depiction, and contextual widgets. However, existing guidance designs are largely built around physical procedural tasks, leaving underexplored how visual guidance should be structured when reference, action, or outcome lies in the virtual layer. We therefore propose a cross-reality step taxonomy and a design space to support structured multimodal guidance across hybrid physical and virtual tasks. 

## 2.3 AI for AR Task Guidance 

With advances in artificial intelligence, recent work [ 9, 15 , 19 , 27 –30 , 35 , 38 , 39 ] increasingly leverage LLMs, VLMs and generative AI to generate procedural steps, infer object references, summarize demonstrations, and provide grounded assistance on demand, reduc-ing reliance on manual authoring. Within this emerging AI-for-AR space, XaiR [ 28 ] demonstrated that multimodal LLM reasoning can integrate live sensory streams and 3D scene representations for grounded XR assistance, while revealing challenges such as latency and fine-grained spatial alignment. TAGGAR [ 29 ] addresses part of this gap by using VLMs to derive task guidance from language and images, lacking continuous fine-grained representational plan-ning in situ. XR-Objects [ 9] extends this direction to object-centric interaction without pre-registration, while it lacks stepwise guid-ance. Meanwhile, CARING-AI [ 27 ] and agentAR [ 39 ] address the authoring bottleneck by integrating AI into AR creation workflows, reducing manual efforts. However, they primarily target content creation rather than runtime task support. Guided Reality [ 38 ] re-turns to runtime guidance by generating multi-step instructions and spatial anchors, but still relies on staged pipelines for selecting representations and placements. Vid2Coach [ 15 ] further supports execution-time assistance through video-based monitoring and feed-back, yet challenges remain in step flexibility. These systems focus on grounding instructions to physical objects and actions, leaving state interpretation, target anticipation, and cross-reality mappings underexplored. In contrast, JARVIS treats AR guidance as both a grounding, a representation, and a planning problem, dynamically determining what to convey, how to present it, and how to adapt to user state and task context. 

## 3 Formative Study 

We present a formative study examining how users perceive and use text, image, and video guidance in both virtual and physical tasks, and use these insights to inform our design space. 

## 3.1 Methods 

Participants. A total of 10 participants (6 males, 4 females) between the ages of 21 and 28 (M=23.9) were recruited. They had varying levels of prior experience across the tasks. Specifically, 2 participants were unfamiliar with the computer task, 7 with the game task, 4 with the origami task, and 3 with the digital painting task. 

Experiment Design. The experiment followed a 4 × 3 (4 Tasks ×

3 Guidance Modalities) within-subjects design to study the effects of guidance modalities on hybrid tasks spanning virtual and physical environments. We considered the following independent variables: (a) Task. We included four tasks spanning both physical and virtual domains: computer setup and origami as physical tasks, and gameplay and digital painting as virtual tasks. (b) Guidance. We explored three guidance types: text, image, and video. Text provided concise textual step-by-step descriptions. Image guidance presented key steps by highlighting relevant objects with bounding boxes and showing important intermediate states, while video guidance demonstrated full execution with contextual and motion cues. All modalities were designed to be comparable in content coverage across modalities. 

Hypothesis. We postulated the following three hypotheses: (1). 

H1: Users’ error rate ( H1.1 ) and completion time ( H1.2 ) will be influenced by the guidance modality of the task. (2). H2: Users will prefer image-based guidance over video, and video over text, as images strike a balance between informativeness and cognitive load, whereas videos provide richer detail with higher cognitive demand, and text offers lower cognitive demand but limited detail. 

Procedures. We divided the study into two parts. Following prior work, in the first part, participants completed a 100-minute session involving four tasks: computer setup and origami (physical), and gameplay and digital painting (virtual). We prepared text-, image-, and video-based guidance for each task. The text guidance was gen-erated by GPT to resemble real-time textual instructions. The image guidance was created by the research team to approximate visual guidance typically delivered by AR systems. The video guidance consisted of publicly available YouTube videos as well as videos produced by the research team to emulate expert-produced tutorials. For each task, participants were given 20 minutes to complete it under Sun et al. Formative Study Example   

> Text Guidance Video Guidance
> Image Guidance Image Guidance Video Guidance
> Text Guidance

Figure 2: Examples from the formative study comparing video, text, and image guidance across representative tasks. 

Figure 3: Comparison of error rate, completion time, and user rating across three guidance modalities: Text (T), Image (I), and Video (V). Significant differences are indicated by brackets. 

the three guidance modalities, with the order counterbalanced using a Latin square design. Participants were given a 5-minute break after completing each task to mitigate fatigue. All guidance materials were reviewed to ensure that participants could follow them and complete each task. In the second part, participants were asked to complete a questionnaire to collect demographic information, prior task fa-miliarity, and perceived workload using the NASA Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) [ 13 ] for each task. They also rated the effectiveness of each guidance modality and their confidence in completing each task without guidance on a 7-point Likert scale. Participants then took part in a 20-minute semi-structured interview to reflect on their experiences with different guidance modalities and task challenges. The interview covered: (a) types of daily tasks requiring guidance; (b) difficulties encountered; (c) modality preferences across real and virtual scenarios; and (d) experiences with state awareness and feedback. Combining questionnaire responses with interview data, we conducted a qualitative analysis of participants’ perceptions and expectations of AR guidance across physical and virtual tasks. 

## 3.2 Observation 

All participants completed the tasks. We recorded task execution data and collected completion time, error rate, and step-level errors, along with perceived workload (NASA-TLX), effectiveness, confidence, and task familiarity from questionnaires. Error rate was computed as the proportion of erroneous steps (6, 13, 13, and 7 steps for computer, game, origami, and digital painting, respectively). We used the Friedman test for all measures. Pairwise comparisons were conducted using Wilcoxon signed-rank tests with Holm correction. We report the following observations (O1–O2 on quantitative results and O3–O6 on qualitative insights), which inform our design space. Additional results can be found in the appendix. 

O1 Completion Time and Error Rate. Guidance modality signifi-cantly affected completion time ( 𝑝 = 0.008 ) and error rate ( 𝑝 < .001 ). Text guidance resulted in higher error rates than image guidance (text: M=13%, SD=1.74 vs. image: M=3%, SD=1.16, 𝑝 = 0.001 ) and longer completion times (text: M=204.57s, SD=110.84 vs. image: M=130.20s, SD=97.57, 𝑝 = 0.013 ). Although video guidance showed higher error rates (M=5%, SD=0.55) and longer completion times (M=165.18s, SD=114.08) than image guidance, the differences were not statistically significant. These results indicated that completion time and error rate were influenced by guidance modality, partially supporting H1.1 and H1.2 . Step-level analysis showed that text guid-ance introduced ambiguity, while video and image guidance could lead to missed steps due to occlusion or oversight. 

O2 Modality Preference. Fig.3 showed a significant preference for video (M=5.65, SD=1.34, 𝑝 < 0.001 ) and image (M=5.425, SD=1.56, 

𝑝 < 0.001 ) over text (M=3.475, SD=1.62), partially supporting H2 .The results aligned with user feedback. Seven participants noted that image and video guidance conveyed context more clearly than text. 

O3 Detail Level. Guidance modalities differed in detail. Text conveyed high-level objectives but lacked precision, images balanced key steps and intermediate states, and video provided rich but sometimes redundant detail. This suggested a need for adaptive guidance with concise overviews and on-demand detail. 

O4 Context and Continuity. Video guidance provided continuous context but could be hindered by occlusion, irrelevant motion, or pacing mismatches. All participants struggled to identify which key to press in the gaming task due to occlusion from the fixed camera view in video guidance. Image guidance captured key states without redundancy but lacked transitions for task flow, while text provided minimal context and required users to infer progression. Continuity was treated as a property of the medium rather than the user’s current situation, suggesting that real-time state tracking offered a more principled foundation for maintaining contextual continuity. 

O5 Interpretability. Text was often ambiguous, while images better highlighted key objects and actions with more clarity. Videos offered richer context but were harder to follow due to occlusion. Participants sought adaptive, environment-aware guidance beyond fixed modalities, with irrelevant content suppressed and concise annotations to improve clarity, capabilities that VLMs could enable. 

O6 Task Characteristics. Participants reported a diverse set of daily tasks requiring instructional guidance, including 36 real-world tasks and 14 virtual tasks. However, when asked to identify the most difficult tasks, participants selected virtual and real-world tasks in comparable numbers (6 vs. 7), suggesting that virtual tasks, although less frequent, were perceived as equally challenging. Participants showed different preferences for guidance modalities across task types. For real-world tasks, they preferred video-based resources such as social media tutorials and manuals, while for virtual tasks they preferred GPT-like systems that provided more targeted guidance. JARVIS : A Just-in-Time AR Visual Instruction System for Cross-Reality Task Guidance 

## 3.3 Challenges 

From participants’ behaviors and feedback, we identified key chal-lenges for AR guidance in hybrid physical–virtual tasks. 

Real-to-Virtual and Virtual-to-Real Transitions. Transitions be-tween real and virtual domains were challenging as users had to verify virtual outcomes of physical actions or translate abstract virtual in-structions into precise real-world operations. In real-to-virtual cases, participants struggled to confirm whether a physical action triggered a virtual response, especially with delayed or subtle feedback. For example, P3 described difficulty in a gaming task requiring precise timing and sustained input, where limited feedback made it unclear if the action was correct, while P7 reported uncertainty when plugging in an HDMI cable due to delayed system feedback. In virtual-to-real transitions, participants had to reconcile virtual guidance with their current environment, often without adequate support, as instructions could be abstract, outdated, or insufficiently grounded in the physi-cal context. For instance, P5 followed a navigation guide using an outdated reference image, making it difficult to confirm the correct location, while P11 was unsure how much water to pour in a cooking task due to the lack of a visual reference tied to her specific pot. 

State Awareness and Feedback. A common challenge was the lack of clear state awareness and feedback. Participants often reported not knowing which state or mode they were in (P2, P9), especially during cross-reality transitions and virtual tasks where feedback was delayed or absent. P9 noted, “I didn’t know what I should do with those icons or tools, and the tutorials online are too long and complex.” Some real-world tasks also required non-visual feedback, such as physical sensations or system responses, for example, sensing car vibrations (P5) or physical discomfort (P11). Given that errors could have serious consequences, participants preferred step-by-step guidance with continuous, reliable feedback. 

Task Complexity and Instruction Mismatch. Participants reported that difficulties often arose when tutorials lacked sufficient detail or did not match the actual task context. Virtual tasks, though less frequent, were more often perceived as difficult, suggesting higher cognitive demands and variability. Common issues included insufficient instruction detail and mismatches between the tutorial and real situations. These challenges were especially pronounced in cross-reality transitions and fully virtual tasks, where users had to bridge gaps between instruction, execution, and feedback. This pattern highlighted the need for adaptive multimodal guidance and motivated the cross-reality step taxonomy in Section 3.4. 

## 3.4 Design Space 

Based on findings from the formative study, we propose a design space for AR guidance systems that support hybrid tasks. 

D1. Cross-Reality Step Types. Participants reported that many tasks spanned physical and virtual environments with frequent cross-reality transitions, suggesting that treating tasks as purely physical or virtual was insufficient. Thus, we model tasks at the level of individual steps defined by the relationship between the instructional reference and the action as shown in Fig.4. Real-to-Real (R2R) refers to steps where both the reference and action occur in the physical world. Real-to-Virtual (R2V) refers to steps where the reference is physical but the effect occurs in the virtual layer. Virtual-to-Real (V2R) refers to steps where the reference is virtual but must be Virtual   

> Virtual
> Reality
> Reality
> Instructional Referent
> Place Tool at
> Highlighted Point
> Fold to Projected
> Contour
> Turn a Knob
> Pour to Virtual Fill
> Line
> Align to Ghosted
> Target
> Rotate Tool to
> Target Pose
> Move Object to
> Virtual Marker Cutting Vegetables
> Fold a Flap
> Insert a Cable
> Place a Block
> Scan a Label to
> Open Overlay
> Tap Marker to
> Invoke Menu
> Move Slider to
> Adjust Simulation
> Press Keyboard
> Press Controller to
> Confirm UI
> Drag Virtual Slider
> Connect Virtual
> Nodes
> Select Menu Item
> Rotate 3D Model
> Toggle Virtual
> Layer
> Virtual to Virtual (V2V) Reality to Virtual (R2V)
> Reality to Reality (R2R) Virtual to Reality (V2R)
> Tighten a Screw
> using map for
> navigation
> Take Picture for
> further adjustment Intended Action/Effect

Figure 4: Cross-Reality Step Types. Steps are categorized into four types based on whether the instructional referent and intended action occur in the real or virtual domain. 

(a) State Cues (b) Target Configuration Preview 

Figure 5: Guidance components: (a) state cues provide feedback on the current state, and (b) target configuration preview visual-izes the desired outcome. 

translated into physical actions. Virtual-to-Virtual (V2V) refers to steps where both the reference and action remain in the virtual layer. 

D2. State Cues. A state panel (Fig.5a) makes invisible system states explicit during cross-reality task execution. It shows the current step, expected next state, overall goal, and concise subgoals or timers, providing a persistent, at-a-glance reference. This helps resolve ambiguity in R2V and V2V transitions by allowing users to verify whether actions are correctly reflected and in the intended state, consistent with prior findings that explicit state presentation improves situational awareness and task performance [26, 33]. 

D3. Target Configuration Preview. A target configuration preview (Fig.5b) visualizes the desired end state, enabling users to compare their current configuration with the intended result rather than inferring it from attention cues. This is useful in V2R and V2V steps, where target configurations span position, orientation, geometry, layout, visual state, and parametric values, serving as a feedforward reference for expected outcomes and early mismatch detection, consistent with prior AR guidance research [37]. 

D4. Correct/Error Feedback. Audio-based correct and error feed-back helps users determine whether their current state has reached the next target state, complementing visual cues. This is motivated by findings that visual information alone is often insufficient, espe-cially for non-visible events such as device connections or subtle physical changes, and in cross-reality transitions where physical actions produce hard-to-verify virtual effects. Instruction systems Sun et al. 

should therefore not only show what to do, but also explicitly confirm correctness, consistent with prior work on corrective feedback [ 37 ]. 

D5. Action Embodiment. Actions are embodied in AR guidance through hands or tools, illustrating how manipulation should be performed. They may be conveyed through virtual or physical hands to illustrate contact, grasp, or finger placement, or through tool representations spanning physical instruments (e.g., brushes, devices) and virtual or software-based tools (e.g., UI controls, digital brushes, keyboard inputs). This embodiment helps users understand how to perform operations, especially for precise or cross-reality tasks. 

D6. Static Cues. Static cues indicate target objects (e.g., bounding boxes, masks, highlights), helping users quickly locate relevant regions and support subsequent action understanding. 

D7. Motion Cues. Unlike static cues, motion cues convey dynamic actions over time (e.g., direction, trajectory, transformation), often using animated arrows or paths. They are especially useful for ex-pressing continuous temporal information, such as changing gestures, tool use, and object state transitions. 

## 4 System Design and Implementation 

In this work, we present JARVIS , a VLM-driven AR instruction system that generates contextual step-by-step guidance in situ with explicit state feedback (Fig. 6). JARVIS treats tutorial execution as a closed-loop process among three components: a pre-task planner ,which generates a structured step plan and pre-fetches relevant media assets, an in-task planner , which continuously verifies the user’s state against expected outcomes and triggers visualization adjustment or sub-step refinement when needed, and a visual renderer , which projects step-specific guidance into the physical environment by com-bining localized object coordinates with VLM-selected visualization strategies. This design enables adaptive step-level refinement and multimodal interaction, allowing guidance to dynamically adjust to user progress and context, improving efficiency and reducing user effort. Our prototype was developed in C# with Unity and deployed on a Meta Quest 3. A backend server with an NVIDIA RTX 3090 handled VLM inference (Gemini 2.5 Flash and Pro [ 12 ]) and material retrieval, while a separate server ran SAM3 [ 5] for object localiza-tion. The system can run on other machines supporting API-based inference, with sufficient GPU memory required for SAM3. 

## 4.1 Pre-task Planner 

Given a prompt, the pre-task planner generates a structured step plan with visual references and rendering parameters, used by the further in-task planner and visual renderer to deliver continuous, context-aware guidance. 

Initial Planning System. At session initialization, the user provides an audio prompt, for example, “How to fold a paper boat?”, which the task planner uses to generate a structured high-level plan. To ground each step in visual references, the system retrieves tutorial images and videos via DuckDuckGo [ 11 ] and yt-dlp [ 36 ], filters the retrieved content using VLM-based relevance scoring, extracts representative frames from video clips when sequential images are unavailable for certain steps, and applies SAM3 [ 5] to segment target object shapes for AR rendering. The planner then generates a JSON-formatted plan in which each step includes a natural-language instruction, an object localization target, a visualization type selected from the design space, and rendering parameters. Step-level media assets are pre-fetched and associated with each step, enabling efficient reuse during AR rendering without additional latency. 

Voice Interaction. To support in-situ clarification, the system allows users to ask questions via audio at any point during execution. User input is integrated into the current step context, enabling the VLM to generate responses grounded in the active instruction. This allows users to request clarification about unfamiliar components or action details, with responses delivered as updated AR guidance. 

## 4.2 In-task Planner 

After the pre-task planner, the in-task planner performs state verifica-tion and sub-planning. It analyzes the current scene, active step, and structured plan to provide context-aware guidance, enabling flexible support when users make mistakes or misunderstand the task. 

State Verification. The system determines step completion either by receiving an API signal from the software or by querying Gemini-2.5-Flash with the current image, step goal, and verification condition to assess whether the scene matches the expected post-action state. If correct, it advances to the next step and initiates the localization and rendering pipeline for the new instruction. If incorrect, it selects a corrective response by revising the visualization strategy (e.g., switching from a bounding box to a motion cue) or invoking sub-planning system to generate a finer-grained recovery sequence. In addition, correct/error feedback (D4) is provided as an audio cue upon verification, providing an explicit, non-visual confirmation channel when outcomes are not visually observable. This dual-path design addresses two common issues identified in our formative study: lack of state feedback and mismatches between tutorial detail and user needs, mitigated through state-aware updates and adaptive sub-planning. 

Sub-Planning System. When state verification identifies an incor-rect outcome that cannot be resolved by visualization adjustment alone, specifically when the mismatch indicates that the current step requires additional procedural detail, the system invokes the sub-planning component. The sub-planner receives the current step description, the VLM’s failure explanation, and the observed scene image, and decomposes the step into a temporary sequence of in-termediate substeps, each with its own instructions, verification conditions, and visualization types. These substeps are inserted into the active state model immediately after the current step, extending the tutorial without disrupting the high-level plan. Once all substeps are verified, the system resumes the original plan. This mechanism is motivated by the observation that many tutorials underspecify dif-ficult steps, and that adaptive local expansion is often more effective than full replanning in most failure cases. 

## 4.3 Visual Renderer 

Based on the verified step specification produced by the in-task planner, we design a visual renderer to provide spatially anchored instruction and state feedback, compositing object state and action overlays directly onto the user’s physical environment in real time. 

Localization. Once a step is verified as the active target, the system localizes the relevant region using Gemini-2.5-Pro to predict 2D screen-space coordinates of the object or interaction area in the captured image. These coordinates are combined with the saved JARVIS : A Just-in-Time AR Visual Instruction System for Cross-Reality Task Guidance 

Figure 6: System architecture of JARVIS, illustrated with an origami boat-folding task, comprising four components: (1) Pre-Task Planner generating a structured JSON task plan from user voice input and retrieved images via Gemini Flash and SAM3, (2) In-Task Planner verifying task state and either advancing with audio confirmation or invoking sub-planning upon failure, (3) Visual Renderer 

localizing targets via Gemini Pro and projecting guidance into 3D space using Meta Quest depth data, and (4) User Interaction 

supporting in-situ voice clarification with real-time AR updates. 

camera pose and depth data from the Meta Quest environment depth API to project the 2D reference into a stable 3D world position. 

Situated Visual Renderer. The rendered visualization type de-pends on the initially planned or revised guidance specification. Each step simultaneously requires two categories of visualization, corresponding to the design space defined in Section 3.4: object state visualization , which communicates what the target object is and what state it should reach, and action guidance visualization ,which communicates how the user should act upon it. 

## 5 Technical Evaluation 

We conducted a technical evaluation to assess the reliability of 

JARVIS in query-driven end-to-end pipeline generation and closed-loop recovery. We evaluate whether the system can generate correct step plans, render appropriate visual guidance, verify user state, and recover from failures via revision or sub-planning. 

## 5.1 Methods 

In query-driven evaluation, we collected 8 user queries covering all step types in Section 3.4, such as “How to change the battery for a controller?”, “How to connect AirPods to a Windows computer?”, and “How to cook an egg?”. For each query, JARVIS generated a structured plan and executed guidance on real or recorded scenes. The set includes 8 tasks and 51 steps. We evaluated the pipeline from planning to rendering, including step correctness, guidance quality, and completion verification. As for visual type evaluation, we used previous data to evaluate spatial embedding accuracy under a structured task plan. We also measure component-wise accuracy and latency for each type. 

## 5.2 Results 

User Query-Driven Results. Table 1 reports end-to-end performance on 51 steps from 8 tasks. The system generated correct guidance for 37/51 steps (74.5%). Key component achieved the highest accuracy (90.2%), while Image Relevance was the most challenging category (76.5%). Visual Type selection also remained challenging (80.4%), indicating limitations in reference retrieval and guidance selection rather than object identification. We observed four main error sources: (1) off-topic retrieval corrupted plans and propagated errors, largely explaining the lower Image Relevance scores; (2) limited guidance diversity (e.g., overuse of palm gestures), even when other gesture types or non-gesture guidance would better match the task; (3) highly state-dependent tasks such as origami were particularly difficult to be detected because object geometry changes after each operation; and (4) errors in state estimation sometimes prevented the system from advancing at the correct time. 

Per-Type Accuracy and Latency. Table 2 isolates the visual ground-ing module and compares two Gemini variants. Gemini-2.5-Pro achieved higher accuracy than Gemini-2.5-Flash (71.4% vs.60.4%) but was much slower (22.73s vs.3.60s), revealing a clear accuracy-latency trade-off: Pro is more reliable for complex grounding, while Flash is faster and sufficient for simpler cases. A major error source for both models was recognizing virtual or stylized interfaces. In software (e.g., Photoshop), dense layouts led to frequent mislocal-ization of icons and controls, while game UIs further increased difficulty due to stylization. Accordingly, performance was generally higher on real-world objects than virtual elements. Performance also varied by guidance type. Flash outperformed Pro on Target Config Preview (81.1% vs.63.6%), suggesting lightweight models suffice for Sun et al. (1)  (2)  (3)  (4) 

Figure 7: JARVIS guidance examples across the four user study tasks: (1) coffee machine latte-making with target configuration preview, gesture, motion, tool, and bounding box, (2) digital painting with tool and motion trajectory overlays, (3) origami boat folding with gesture, shape preview and arrow guidance, (4) gaming task with state cues, tool, bounding box and arrow indicators. Table 1: Technical evaluation results across 51 steps from 8 tasks with user queries.                                  

> Metric Total Correct Steps Percentage
> TextInstruction 51 45 88.2% VisualType 51 41 80.4% Key Component 51 46 90.2% Image Relevance 51 39 76.5% Verification 51 42 82.3% Target Config Preview 13 11 84.6% Motion 24 20 83.3% Static Object 38 32 84.2% Action 33 28 84.8% Total 51 38 74.5%

simple targets. In contrast, Pro performed better on Motion (85.7% and 71.4%), Static Object (74.2% vs.54.1%) and Action (68.0% vs.51.6%), which requires stronger spatial reasoning. Within Action ,

Tool localization was the most difficult, especially for Flash (38.0%). 

## 6 User Study 

We evaluated JARVIS through a controlled within-subjects study, comparing it with two baselines: an arrow baseline , which used a static yellow arrow and procedural text to indicate target locations following the design of GuidedReality [ 38 ], and an image baseline ,which presented reference images beside or over the target area using the same retrieved materials and procedural text as JARVIS. We focused on the following research questions:(1). RQ1: Can JARVIS 

provide higher usability and lower cognitive load compared to conventional guidance baselines? (2). RQ2: Does JARVIS improve task performance relative to arrow-based and image-based guidance? (3). RQ3: Which visual guidance strategies do users find most effective, and how does their utility vary across task contexts? 

Table 2: Per-type accuracy (Acc.) and latency (Lat.) for visual guidance and component breakdown. F denotes Gemini-2.5-Flash and P denotes Gemini-2.5-Pro.                                                 

> Type / Component Acc. (F) Lat. (F) Acc. (P) Lat. (P) Target Config Preview 81.1% 2.85 63.6% 20.83 2D Box 81.1% 2.85 63.6% 20.83
> Motion 71.4% 2.94 85.7% 18.23 Translation Info 66.6% 2.81 83.3% 16.19 Rotation Info 100% 66.67% 3.65 100% 20.23
> Static Object 54.1% 3.83 74.2% 23.29 2D Box 54.1% 3.83 74.2% 23.29
> Action 51.6% 4.02 68% 24.31 Tool 38% 4.65 66.6% 28.72 Gesture 80% 2.68 70% 19.89
> Total 60.4% 3.60 71.4% 22.73

## 6.1 Methods 

Participants. We recruited 14 participants (4 female, 9 male, 1 non-binary) between the ages of 21 and 29 (M=24.625). Participants had varying levels of prior experience across tasks. Specifically, 5 participants were unfamiliar with the coffee task, 11 with the gaming task, 10 with the origami task, and 8 with the digital painting task. 

Apparatus. We used a Meta Quest 3 headset as the AR device for the study. The headset was connected to a server with an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU to process API calls and fetch real-time results. 

Tasks and Procedure. Participants completed six tasks (two per condition) across three conditions: JARVIS , the arrow baseline ,and the image baseline . Following prior work [ 15 ], we used partial task sampling from four representative hybrid virtual and physical tasks to reduce participant workload: coffee making (R2R), gaming (V2V), origami (V2R), and digital painting (R2V). Task assignment JARVIS : A Just-in-Time AR Visual Instruction System for Cross-Reality Task Guidance Arrow 

> Baseline
> Image
> Baseline
> JARVIS  Reference

Figure 8: Comparison of task outcomes across three guidance conditions. Each column shows the reference alongside results from the arrow baseline , image baseline, and JARVIS across four tasks (digital painting, origami, gaming, coffee). The inset shows the corresponding Meta Quest 3 AR view during task execution. 

and condition order were counterbalanced to mitigate learning and ordering effects. All participants followed the same pre-generated task plans. Participants were given 10-minute breaks after every three tasks, and sessions were stopped if discomfort was reported. Afterwards, participants filled out a questionnaire on prior task familiarity, system usability (SUS [ 3]), perceived workload (NASA-TLX [ 13 ]), and ratings of guidance effectiveness, followed by a semi-structured interview. The entire session lasted around 2 hours. 

## 6.2 Results 

We assessed normality using the Shapiro–Wilk test and applied the Friedman test for data analysis. Compared to the two baseline sys-tems, JARVIS demonstrated promising improvements in quantitative measures, including reduced cognitive load as indicated by NASA-TLX scores and improved usability (Fig.9). Additional metrics and user feedback are presented in the subsections below. 

Usability. System condition significantly affected usability. JARVIS (M=44.43, SD=9.20, p=0.0340) was rated significantly more usable than the arrow baseline (M=30.93, SD=8.75, p=0.0226), with no difference from the image baseline (M=41.71, SD=9.04, p=0.5289). This aligned with the interview findings. While three participants who preferred the image baseline cited greater task familiarity and its more concise layout, 11 out of 14 participants preferred JARVIS. P1 noted that JARVIS helped “bridge gaps between steps,” while P8 found the additional explanations especially useful when reference images did not match the actual scene. 

Perceived Workload. Perceived workload differed significantly across conditions. Both JARVIS (M=35.20, SD=13.07) and the im-age baseline (M=33.99, SD=13.93) yielded lower workload than the 

Figure 9: The statistical analysis of different evaluation results. 

arrow baseline (M=46.91, SD=13.65, p<0.05), with no difference between JARVIS and the image baseline (p=0.7798). These results indicated reduced subjective burden for both JARVIS and the im-age baseline relative to the arrow baseline . Overall, these findings partially support RQ1 . JARVIS improved perceived usability and reduced workload relative to the arrow baseline , but did not sig-nificantly outperform the image baseline . This indicates that richer, state-aware guidance is more effective than simple directional cues, while offering experience comparable to image-based guidance. 

Task Performance. The Friedman test found no significant dif-ference in valid completion time across conditions ( 𝜒 2 (2) = 1.33 ,p=0.5134). The image baseline was fastest on average (M=631.33), followed by JARVIS (M=690.42) and the arrow baseline (M=707.17) , likely due to the limited number of participants (n=6) with fully valid paired data. However, success rate differed significantly: JARVIS achieved the highest success rate (M=0.75, SD=0.21), significantly outperforming the arrow baseline (M=0.42, SD=0.34, p=0.0377), while the difference relative to the image baseline (M=0.50, SD=0.39) did not reach significance (p=0.0696). Step-level analysis (Fig. 10) reveals a clearer picture. Across all conditions, 88.5% of steps were completed correctly, while the remaining steps were distributed across technical errors (5.5%), skip-guidance events (5.9%, 𝑛 = 59 ), step omissions (2.0%, 𝑛 = 20 ), and incorrect order errors (0.5%). JARVIS achieved the best step-level performance, with 96.3% cor-rect completion (365/379), substantially higher than both the image baseline (86.2%, 294/341) and the arrow baseline (74.3%, 226/304). JARVIS also produced the fewest technical errors (10 cases, 2.6%) and omissions (4 cases, 1.1%), and notably had no incorrect-order or skip-guidance events. This suggests that participants were generally able to follow JARVIS continuously and execute the required actions with relatively few breakdowns. Task-specific patterns further high-light these differences. Procedural tasks like Making Latte posed minimal demands and all conditions performed well. Whereas, tasks requiring precise execution ( Origami ), dynamic state tracking ( Gam-ing ), or sustained multi-step progress ( Digital Painting ) exposed clear baseline limitations: skip-guidance and technical errors accumulated notably, while JARVIS maintained consistently high completion throughout. Overall, JARVIS improves performance by increasing step-level reliability rather than reducing completion time, reducing errors and guidance abandonment for more stable execution ( RQ2 ). 

Effectiveness of Visualizations. Perceived effectiveness differed significantly across visualization types ( 𝜒 2 (5) = 29 .08 , p<0.001). State cues (M=5.4, SD=0.74) and target configuration previews Sun et al. 

Figure 10: Step-level completion heatmap across three systems (JARVIS, arrow baseline , image baseline ) and four task types (R2R, R2V, V2R, V2V). Each row represents a participant and each column an action step, color-coded by outcome: correct completion, step omission, technical error, incorrect order, and skip guidance. 

(M=5.33, SD=1.03) were rated highest, as they clearly conveyed task state and completion criteria. Localization-based cues, tool cue (M=3.73, SD=1.23), arrow (M=3.71, SD=1.34), gesture (M=3.61, SD=0.79), and bounding box (M=3.55, SD=1.13), were rated lower, largely due to spatial imprecision where the predicted center drifted away from the target region and small GUI elements further ampli-fied minor localization offsets. Additionally, icon-based tool cues (e.g., left/right-click indicators) were often overlooked or misinter-preted by novices, who treated them as decorative or failed to map them to actions, suggesting that symbolic cues alone were insuffi-cient without state or outcome information. Post-hoc tests showed state cues outperformed the bounding box (p=0.0433) and gesture (p=0.0213), but not the arrow (p=0.0563), tool cue (p=0.0746), or target configuration preview (p=1.000). Target configuration preview also exceeded gesture (p=0.0306). Although differences with the arrow and tool cue were not significant, both were descriptively lower, consistent with reported spatial imprecision. Descriptive statistics revealed task-specific variation in visualization utility. State cues and target configuration previews ranked highest overall, with pre-views strongest in origami (M=6.12) and digital painting (M=6.38), and state cues leading in coffee (M=5.2) and gaming (M=5.00). In contrast, gesture (gaming, M=2.43), tool cue (origami, M=2.25), and bounding box (digital painting, M=2.88) were least effective, suggesting localization-based cues were sensitive to task precision and cross-reality demands. Overall, participants favored JARVIS’s visualization strategies. Rather than simple object localization, they valued guidance conveying current state, target state, and completion criteria. State cues, target configuration previews, and audio feedback were consistently cited as most effective, highlighting the importance of continuous state-aware and goal-oriented guidance ( RQ3 ). 

Cross-Reality Tutorial System. Although SUS scores showed no significant difference between JARVIS and the image baseline , 11/14 participants preferred JARVIS. They attributed this to its ability to bridge gaps between steps and provide explanations when reference 

Figure 11: Distribution of participants’ ratings on the perceived effectiveness of six visual guidance cues. 

images did not match the actual scene. For example, P4 stated that it "conveyed the most information clearly and concisely," and P8 highlighted that “the additional explanatory information was especially useful when the images did not match the actual scene.” Several participants also reported difficulty with high-level tasks (e.g., gaming), where instructions were harder to translate into concrete actions. While arrows and highlights helped with localization, they were often too abstract to convey how a step should be performed. Overall, participants favored concise, coarse-grained guidance with optional on-demand detail. 

## 7 Discussion and Limitations 

JARVIS and Baselines in Guiding Users. JARVIS balances informa-tiveness and actionability in cross-reality AR guidance. Quantitative results show that JARVIS achieved the highest usability and success rate, significantly outperforming the arrow baseline , while the image baseline achieved comparable usability but lower success ( RQ1, RQ2 ). Step-level analysis further shows fewer errors and lower skip rates with JARVIS . While three participants preferred the image baseline due to familiarity and lower cognitive load, it could be JARVIS : A Just-in-Time AR Visual Instruction System for Cross-Reality Task Guidance 

noticed most users preferred JARVIS for effectively balancing in-formativeness and cognitive load, valuing clear state, target, and completion cues over the number of visual elements. 

State Interpretation Over Object Localization. As reported, state cues and target previews significantly outperformed localization-based cues, especially in cross-reality tasks. Participants preferred guidance that conveyed state, target configuration, and completion criteria over simple localization. With arrows or bounding boxes alone, users could locate regions but remained uncertain about progress or completion, a limitation amplified in cross-reality steps. Localization cues also suffered from spatial imprecision, particularly for small or dense targets. Their lower performance reflects two key issues: insufficient support for state understanding and limited spatial precision, both addressed by state-oriented visualizations. 

Semantic Gap Between Abstract Cues and Physical Action. 

While localization cues direct attention, some actions remain hard to convey with icons or arrows alone. Step-level errors (Fig. 10) illustrate this: press-and-drag actions in digital painting were unclear, right-click cues in gaming were overlooked, and origami folds lacked intermediate states. These results highlight the need for richer representations beyond static cues, like automatically extracted keyframes and explicit object or gesture states from tutorial videos, to better capture action semantics and state transitions. 

Toward Real-Time State Monitoring and Precise Visual Cues. 

Users need more frequent state verification and more precise visual cues. A limitation of JARVIS is state verification is user-triggered rather than continuous, meaning errors may persist until the next interaction. Continuous monitoring could address this but is costly due to many VLM queries. Future work might explore lightweight on-device models for continuous state tracking, reserving VLMs for ambiguous cases to enable real-time error detection with lower overhead. Spatial imprecision also remains a challenge, especially for small GUI elements and fine manipulations. Improved detection or alternative cues (e.g., dynamic animations or contact-point indicators) may enhance precision. Similar issues, such as ambiguous rotation and contact points, have also been reported in Guided Reality[38]. 

## 8 Conclusion 

This paper presents JARVIS , an AR instruction system that generates contextual, step-by-step guidance with explicit state feedback to support diverse hybrid virtual and physical tutorial tasks from a single prompt. We conducted a formative study to investigate how AR guidance supports hybrid physical and virtual tasks and to derive a design space for multimodal guidance across cross-reality scenarios. A user study with 14 participants demonstrates that JARVIS achieves higher usability, lower perceived workload, and improved task success rates compared to baselines. Currently, video clips and state feedback are user-triggered. In future work, we aim to incorporate real-time state verification and more precise visual cues to enable timely error detection and more accurate task guidance. 

## Acknowledgments References 

[1] Alexander Barquero, Rodrigo Luis Calvo, Daniel Alexander Delgado, Isaac Wang, Lisa Anthony, and Jaime Ruiz. 2024. Understanding User Needs for Task Guidance Systems Through the Lens of Cooking. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Copenhagen, Denmark) (DIS ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2006–2018. doi:10.1145/3643834.3661611 [2] Jonas Blattgerste, Patrick Renner, and Thies Pfeiffer. 2019. Authorable augmented reality instructions for assistance and training in work environments. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia (Pisa, Italy) (MUM ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 34, 11 pages. doi:10.1145/3365610.3365646 [3] John Brooke. 1996. SUS: A ’Quick’ and ’Dirty’ Usability Scale. In Usability Eval-uation in Industry , Patrick W. Jordan, Bruce Thomas, Bernard A. Weerdmeester, and Ian Lyall McClelland (Eds.). Taylor and Francis, Chapter 21, 189–194. [4] Yuanzhi Cao, Anna Fuste, and Valentin Heun. 2022. MobileTutAR: a Lightweight Augmented Reality Tutorial System using Spatially Situated Human Segmentation Videos. In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI EA ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 396, 8 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3491101.3519639 [5] Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, Andrew Huang, et al . 2025. Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 (2025). [6] Boyuan Chen, Xinan Yan, Xuning Hu, Dominic Kao, and Hai-Ning Liang. 2024. Impact of Tutorial Modes with Different Time Flow Rates in Virtual Reality Games. Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech. 7, 1, Article 6 (May 2024), 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3651296 [7] Chen Chen, Cuong Nguyen, Jane Hoffswell, Jennifer Healey, Trung Bui, and Nadir Weibel. 2023. PaperToPlace: Transforming Instruction Documents into Spatialized and Context-Aware Mixed Reality Experiences. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (San Francisco, CA, USA) (UIST ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 118, 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606832 [8] Subramanian Chidambaram, Hank Huang, Fengming He, Xun Qian, Ana M Villanueva, Thomas S Redick, Wolfgang Stuerzlinger, and Karthik Ramani. 2021. ProcessAR: An augmented reality-based tool to create in-situ procedural 2D/3D AR Instructions. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Virtual Event, USA) (DIS ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 234–249. doi:10.1145/3461778.3462126 [9] Mustafa Doga Dogan, Eric J Gonzalez, Karan Ahuja, Ruofei Du, Andrea Colaço, Johnny Lee, Mar Gonzalez-Franco, and David Kim. 2024. Augmented Object Intelligence with XR-Objects. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (UIST ’24) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 19, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3654777.3676379 [10] Mustafa Doga Dogan, Eric J Gonzalez, Karan Ahuja, Ruofei Du, Andrea Colaço, Johnny Lee, Mar Gonzalez-Franco, and David Kim. 2024. Augmented object intelligence with xr-objects. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1–15. [11] DuckDuckGo. 2026. DuckDuckGo. https://duckduckgo.com/. Search engine. Accessed March 30, 2026. [12] Google. 2026. Gemini API. https://ai.google.dev/api. Accessed: 2026-03-31. [13] Sandra G Hart and Lowell E Staveland. 1988. Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. Human mental workload 1, 3 (1988), 139–183. [14] Gaoping Huang, Xun Qian, Tianyi Wang, Fagun Patel, Maitreya Sreeram, Yuanzhi Cao, Karthik Ramani, and Alexander J. Quinn. 2021. AdapTutAR: An Adaptive Tutoring System for Machine Tasks in Augmented Reality. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 417, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3411764.3445283 [15] Mina Huh, Zihui Xue, Ujjaini Das, Kumar Ashutosh, Kristen Grauman, and Amy Pavel. 2025. Vid2Coach: Transforming How-To Videos into Task Assistants. In 

Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 46, 24 pages. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747612 [16] Panayu Keelawat and Ryo Suzuki. 2024. Transforming Procedural Instructions into In-Situ Augmented Reality Guides with InstructAR. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 

(Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (UIST Adjunct ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 70, 3 pages. doi:10.1145/3672539.3686321 [17] Junhan Kong, Dena Sabha, Jeffrey P Bigham, Amy Pavel, and Anhong Guo. 2021. TutorialLens: Authoring Interactive Augmented Reality Tutorials Through Narration and Demonstration. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Symposium on Spatial User Interaction (Virtual Event, USA) (SUI ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 16, 11 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3485279.3485289 [18] Tobias Langlotz, Holger Regenbrecht, Stefanie Zollmann, and Dieter Schmalstieg. 2013. Audio stickies: visually-guided spatial audio annotations on a mobile aug-mented reality platform. In Proceedings of the 25th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference: Augmentation, Application, Innovation, Collaboration Sun et al. 

(Adelaide, Australia) (OzCHI ’13) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 545–554. doi:10.1145/2541016.2541022 [19] Jaewook Lee, Filippo Aleotti, Diego Mazala, Guillermo Garcia-Hernando, Sara Vicente, Oliver James Johnston, Isabel Kraus-Liang, Jakub Powierza, Donghoon Shin, Jon E. Froehlich, Gabriel Brostow, and Jessica Van Brummelen. 2025. Imag-inateAR: AI-Assisted In-Situ Authoring in Augmented Reality. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 52, 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747635 [20] Chenyi Li, Guande Wu, Gromit Yeuk-Yin Chan, Dishita Gdi Turakhia, Sonia Castelo Quispe, Dong Li, Leslie Welch, Claudio Silva, and Jing Qian. 2025. Satori: Towards Proactive AR Assistant with Belief-Desire-Intention User Modeling. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1229, 24 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714188 [21] Ziyi Liu, Zhengzhe Zhu, Enze Jiang, Feichi Huang, Ana M Villanueva, Xun Qian, Tianyi Wang, and Karthik Ramani. 2023. InstruMentAR: Auto-Generation of Augmented Reality Tutorials for Operating Digital Instruments Through Recording Embodied Demonstration. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 32. doi:10.1145/3544548. 3581442 [22] Peter Mohr, Bernhard Kerbl, Michael Donoser, Dieter Schmalstieg, and Denis Kalkofen. 2015. Retargeting Technical Documentation to Augmented Reality. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Comput-ing Systems (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (CHI ’15) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3337–3346. doi:10.1145/2702123.2702490 [23] Peter Mohr, David Mandl, Markus Tatzgern, Eduardo Veas, Dieter Schmalstieg, and Denis Kalkofen. 2017. Retargeting Video Tutorials Showing Tools With Surface Contact to Augmented Reality. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 6547–6558. doi:10. 1145/3025453.3025688 [24] Tam V. Nguyen, Bilal Mirza, Dorothy Tan, and Jose Sepulveda. 2018. AS-MIM: Augmented Reality Authoring System for Mobile Interactive Manuals. In 

Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication (Langkawi, Malaysia) (IMCOM ’18) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 3, 6 pages. doi:10.1145/3164541.3164592 [25] Lev Poretski and Anthony Tang. 2022. Press A to Jump: Design Strategies for Video Game Learnability. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 155, 26 pages. doi:10.1145/3491102.3517685 [26] HyunA Seo, Juheon Yi, Rajesh Balan, and Youngki Lee. 2024. GradualReality: Enhancing Physical Object Interaction in Virtual Reality via Interaction State-Aware Blending. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (UIST ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 82, 14 pages. doi:10. 1145/3654777.3676463 [27] Jingyu Shi, Rahul Jain, Seunggeun Chi, Hyungjun Doh, Hyung-gun Chi, Alexan-der J. Quinn, and Karthik Ramani. 2025. CARING-AI: Towards Authoring Context-aware Augmented Reality INstruction through Generative Artificial In-telligence. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 29, 23 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713348 [28] Sruti Srinidhi, Edward Lu, and Anthony Rowe. 2024. XaiR: An XR Platform that Integrates Large Language Models with the Physical World. In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) . 759–767. doi:10.1109/ISMAR62088.2024.00091 [29] Daniel Stover and Doug Bowman. 2024. TAGGAR: General-Purpose Task Guidance from Natural Language in Augmented Reality using Vision-Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Symposium on Spatial User Interaction 

(Trier, Germany) (SUI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 12, 12 pages. doi:10.1145/3677386.3682095 [30] Yiliu Tang, Jason Situ, Andrea Yaoyun Cui, Mengke Wu, and Yun Huang. 2025. LLM Integration in Extended Reality: A Comprehensive Review of Current Trends, Challenges, and Future Perspectives. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1054, 24 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714224 [31] Balasaravanan Thoravi Kumaravel, Fraser Anderson, George Fitzmaurice, Bjoern Hartmann, and Tovi Grossman. 2019. Loki: Facilitating Remote Instruction of Physical Tasks Using Bi-Directional Mixed-Reality Telepresence. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 

(New Orleans, LA, USA) (UIST ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 161–174. doi:10.1145/3332165.3347872 [32] Nhan (Nathan) Tran, Ethan Yang, and Abe Davis. 2025. ARticulate: Interactive Visual Guidance for Demonstrated Rotational Degrees of Freedom in Mobile AR. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 28, 8 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713179 [33] Julia Woodward and Jaime Ruiz. 2023. Analytic Review of Using Augmented Reality for Situational Awareness. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 29, 4 (2023), 2166–2183. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2022.3141585 [34] Masahiro Yamaguchi, Shohei Mori, Peter Mohr, Markus Tatzgern, Ana Stanescu, Hideo Saito, and Denis Kalkofen. 2020. Video-Annotated Augmented Reality Assembly Tutorials. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Virtual Event, USA) (UIST ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1010–1022. doi:10.1145/ 3379337.3415819 [35] Ramez Yousri, Zeyad Essam, Yehia Kareem, Youstina Sherief, Sherry Gamil, and Soha Safwat. 2024. IllusionX: An LLM-powered mixed reality personal companion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07924 (2024). [36] yt-dlp contributors. 2026. yt-dlp. https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp. Software repository. Accessed March 30, 2026. [37] Xingyao Yu, Benjamin Lee, and Michael Sedlmair. 2024. Design Space of Visual Feedforward And Corrective Feedback in XR-Based Motion Guidance Systems. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 723, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642143 [38] Ada Yi Zhao, Aditya Gunturu, Ellen Yi-Luen Do, and Ryo Suzuki. 2025. Guided Reality: Generating Visually-Enriched AR Task Guidance with LLMs and Vision Models. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 146, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747784 [39] Chenfei Zhu, Shao-Kang Hsia, Xiyun Hu, Ziyi Liu, Jingyu Shi, and Karthik Ramani. 2025. agentAR: Creating Augmented Reality Applications with Tool-Augmented LLM-based Autonomous Agents. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’25) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 54, 23 pages. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747676 

## A Prompt Strategy 

For the prompt strategy, we explicitly constrain the model to produce valid JSON so that the output can be directly parsed by the client and mapped to rendering actions. This structured format also enables a clear separation between symbolic planning and situated execution: the planner specifies what should be done and what kind of guidance should be shown, while the runtime verifier determines whether the current step is complete and whether local refinement is needed. 

## A.1 Initial Prompt 

In the initial plan, each step contains an instruction, one or more visualization types, a target object or region to localize, and a verification rule that defines success. 

**Output valid JSON only, do not include extra text or comments.** goal: One sentence starting with a verb, clear and testable (e.g., "Boil a pot of water"). steps: Break into 3–12 steps; each starts with a verb and uses consistent granularity. plannerResponse.next: Must be one of the steps, or a sub-step of a step (e.g., "Heat the pot / set to medium heat"). viz: Each step requires TWO types of visualization: 1. objectViz: How to visualize the object to operate on - "Outline": Green bounding box to identify object location (use when object position needs highlighting) - "ShapePreview": Shape/area preview image (use when object shape or area needs to be shown, especially with SAM3 segmentation) 2. actionViz: How to visualize the hand/target object action or move-ment - "Arrow": For movement/rotation (translation or rotation). Requires waypoints with start and end positions. - "Gesture": For hand JARVIS : A Just-in-Time AR Visual Instruction System for Cross-Reality Task Guidance 

gestures (e.g., pinch, poke, grip). System will search for matching image in Resources/Image. - "Tool": For tool actions (e.g., mouseclick). System will search for matching image in Resources/Image. SPECIAL RULE: If both objectViz="ShapePreview" AND action-Viz="Arrow", the system will animate the ShapePreview image instead of showing an arrow. waypoints: At least one "target" waypoint for the object to operate on. If actionViz="Arrow" with translation, include both "target" (start) and "endtarget" (end position). If actionViz="Arrow" with rotation, include "target" with rotation axis and direction information. The object name should be precise, and different types of names can be explored. Adjectives may be added to further describe the object (e.g., white knob, black pot). CRITICAL: - If tracking an item in the game world, name it directly (e.g., "flint stone on ground"). - If tracking text or UI, use the word "text" or "button" (e.g., "Pick up flint text", "Crafting button", "Axe icon in Leftside UI"). - If tracking keyboard, use the description like "W on keyboard". - NEVER use ambiguous words like "prompt", "area" as the object-Name. 

json format : {"goal ": "", " steps ": [], "plannerResponse": { "next ": "", "check": "", "success ": false , "viz ": { " objectViz ": "Outline | ShapePreview", " actionViz ": "Arrow|Gesture| Tool | null ", "actionType ": [" translation "] | [" rotation "] | ["pinch "] | ["mouseclick"] | ..., " needsTranslation ": true | false , " needsRotation ": true | false , "waypoints ": [{"type ": " target ", "objectName": "" }, {"type ": " endtarget ", "objectName": "" }]}}}Example: {"goal ": "Turn the gas knob to medium heat", " steps ": [

"Locate the gas knob", "Turn the gas knob clockwise to medium position" ], "plannerResponse": { "next ": "Turn the gas knob clockwise to medium position ", "check": "", "success ": false , "viz ": { " objectViz ": "Outline ", " actionViz ": "Arrow", "actionType ": [" rotation "], " needsRotation ": true , " needsTranslation ": false , "waypoints ": [{"type ": " target ", "objectName": " silver gas knob" }]}}}

## A.2 During-task Prompt 

During execution, the verification output augments this structure with completion status, error feedback, and optional substeps. 

You are a task tutor. You will be given an existing plannerResponse as a template. Your task is to: 1. FILL IN these three fields based on the current photo: - next: The specific sub-goal for the next step (if current step is not successfully reached). - success: Please check the image and confirm if current step is reached, only answer true or false. - check: If you are not sure of the result of success, tell me what you need to further check. If you are sure, leave it empty or skip it. 2. VERIFY the field from the existing plannerResponse: - waypoints: Verify that the waypoint objectNames and types are still relevant and suitable for current visualization. Keep the existing waypoint structure unless it’s completely inappropriate. IMPORTANT: Use the existing plannerResponse as your base template. Ignore any unnecessary details when judging the status. e.g. only focus on paper shape when doing origami. 

## A.3 Rotation Prompt 

The pivot point will rotate around a pivot point (objectName) in the image to match the last reference image. Please identify the position of pivot point. Refer to the first image to set up the spatial axis, with X pointing rightward in the photo, Y pointing physically upward, and Z pointing toward you. Identify the rotational axis as X, Y, or Z. Always look from the positive side and determine the rotation direction as Positive (clockwise) or Negative (CounterClockwise). Each value must be int between 0–1000 normalized. Output using this JSON format: Sun et al. 

{{name: "", pos: [x_min, y_min, x_max, y_max], rotation : [ axis , direction ]}} 

## A.4 Transformation Prompt 

Please identify where objectName will end up after the in-step guid-ance. Each value must be int between 0-1000 normalized. Output each position item using this JSON format: 

{type : " starttarget | endtarget | object ", name: " exact waypoint name", pos: [x_min, y_min, x_max, y_max]}.